G.O.P. Revolt Sinks Bid to Void Health Law

By ROBERT PEAR, THOMAS KAPLAN and MAGGIE HABERMAN
House Speaker Paul D. Ryan walked in the Capitol on Friday after a vote on the rules for debating the American Health Care Act, the bill to replace the Affordable Care Act known as Obamacare. Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times
WASHINGTON — House Republican leaders, facing a revolt among conservatives and moderates in their ranks, pulled legislation to repeal the Affordable Care Act from consideration on the House floor Friday in a major defeat for President Trump on the first legislative showdown of his presidency.

“We’re going to be living with Obamacare for the foreseeable future,” the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, conceded.

The failure of the Republicans’ three-month blitz to repeal President Barack Obama’s signature domestic achievement exposed deep divisions in the Republican Party that the election of a Republican president could not mask. It cast a long shadow over the ambitious agenda that Mr. Trump and Republican leaders had promised to enact once their party assumed power at both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue.

And it was the biggest defeat of Mr. Trump’s young presidency, which has suffered many. His travel ban has been blocked by the courts. Allegations of questionable ties to the Russian government forced out his national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn. Tensions with key allies such as Germany, Britain and Australia are high, and Mr. Trump’s approval ratings are at historic lows.

Republican leaders were willing to tolerate Mr. Trump’s foibles with the promise that he would sign into law their conservative agenda. The collective defeat of the health care effort could strain that tolerance.

Mr. Trump, in a telephone interview moments after the bill was pulled, tried to put the most flattering light on it. “The best thing that could happen is exactly what happened — watch,” he said.

“Obamacare unfortunately will explode,” Mr. Trump said later. “It’s going to have a very bad year.” At some point, he said, after another round of big premium increases, “Democrats will come to us and say, ‘Look, let’s get together and get a great health care bill or plan that’s really great for the people of our country.’”

Mr. Trump expressed weariness with the effort, though its failure took a fraction of the time that Democrats devoted to enacting the Affordable Care Act in 2009 and 2010. “It’s enough already,” the president said.

A major reason for the bill’s demise was the opposition of members of the conservative House Freedom Caucus, which wanted more aggressive steps to lower insurance costs and to dismantle federal regulation of insurance products.

In a day of high drama, Mr. Ryan rushed to the White House shortly after noon on Friday to tell Mr. Trump he did not have the votes for a repeal bill that had been promised for seven years — since Mr. Obama signed the landmark health care law. During a 3 p.m. phone call, the two men decided to withdraw the bill rather than watch its defeat on the House floor.

Mr. Trump later told journalists in the Oval Office that Republicans were 10 to 15 votes short of what they needed to pass the repeal bill.

The effort to win passage had been relentless, and hardly hidden. Vice President Mike Pence and Tom Price, the health secretary, visited Capitol Hill on Friday for a late appeal to House conservatives, but their pleas fell on deaf ears.

“You can’t pretend and say this is a win for us,” said Representative Mark Walker of North Carolina, the chairman of the conservative Republican Study Committee, who conceded it was a “good moment” for Democrats.

“Probably that champagne that wasn’t popped back in November may be utilized this evening,” Mr. Walker said.

At 3:30 p.m. on Friday, Mr. Ryan called Republicans into a closed-door meeting to deliver the news that the bill would be withdrawn, with no plans to try again. The meeting lasted five minutes. One of the architects of the House bill, Representative Greg Walden, Republican of Oregon and the chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee, put it bluntly: “This bill’s done.”

“We are going to focus on other issues at this point,” he said.

The Republican bill would have repealed tax penalties for people without health insurance, rolled back federal insurance standards, reduced subsidies for the purchase of private insurance and set new limits on spending for Medicaid, the federal-state program that covers more than 70 million low-income people. The bill would have repealed hundreds of billions of dollars in taxes imposed by the Affordable Care Act and would also have cut off federal funds to Planned Parenthood for one year.

Mr. Ryan had said the bill included “huge conservative wins.” But it never won over conservatives who wanted a more thorough eradication of the Affordable Care Act. Nor did it have the backing of more moderate Republicans who were anxiously aware of the Congressional Budget Office’s assessment that the bill would leave 24 million more Americans without insurance in 2024, compared with the number who would be uninsured under the current law.

The budget office also warned that in the short run, the Republicans’ legislation would drive insurance premiums higher. For older Americans approaching retirement, the cost of insurance could have risen sharply.

With the House’s most hard-line conservatives holding fast against the bill, support for the legislation collapsed Friday after more and more Republicans came out in opposition. They included Representatives Rodney Frelinghuysen of New Jersey, the soft-spoken chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, and Barbara Comstock of Virginia, whose suburban Washington district went for the Democratic presidential nominee, Hillary Clinton, in November.

“Seven years after enactment of Obamacare, I wanted to support legislation that made positive changes to rescue health care in America,” Mr. Frelinghuysen said. “Unfortunately, the legislation before the House today is currently unacceptable as it would place significant new costs and barriers to care on my constituents in New Jersey.”

The bill died after Republican leaders, in a bid for conservative support, agreed to eliminate federal standards for the minimum benefits that must be provided by certain health insurance policies.

“It’s so cartoonishly malicious that I can picture someone twirling their mustache as they drafted it in their secret Capitol lair last night,” said Representative Jim McGovern, Democrat of Massachusetts. “Republicans are killing the requirements that insurance plans cover essential health benefits” such as emergency services, maternity care, mental health care, substance abuse treatment and prescription drugs.

Mr. Trump blamed Democrats for the bill’s defeat, and they proudly accepted responsibility.

“Let’s just, for a moment, breathe a sigh of relief for the American people that the Affordable Care Act was not repealed,” said Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House Democratic leader.

Defeat of the bill could be a catalyst if it forces Republicans and Democrats to work together to improve the Affordable Care Act, which members of both parties say needs repair. Democrats have been saying for weeks that they want to work with Republicans on such changes, but first, they said, Republicans must abandon their drive to repeal the law.

“Obamacare is the law of the land,” Mr. Ryan said. “It’s going to remain the law of the land until it’s replaced.”

Whatever success Mr. Trump had in making business deals, he utterly failed in his first effort at cutting a deal at the pinnacle of power in Washington, Democrats said.

“This is not the art of the deal,” said Representative Lloyd Doggett, Democrat of Texas, alluding to Mr. Trump’s best-selling book. “It is the art of the steal, of taking away insurance coverage from families that really need it to provide tax breaks for those at the very top.”

Rejection of the repeal bill may prompt Republicans to reconsider the political strategy they were planning to use for the next few years.

“We have to do some soul-searching internally to determine whether or not we are even capable of functioning as a governing body,” said Representative Kevin Cramer, Republican of North Dakota. “If ‘no’ is your goal, it’s the easiest goal in the world to reach.”

Representative Robert Pittenger, Republican of North Carolina, offered this advice to hard-line conservatives who helped sink the bill: “Follow the example of Ronald Reagan. He was a master; he built consensus. He would say, ‘I’ll take 80 percent and come back for the other 20 percent later.’”

Failure of the House effort leaves the Affordable Care Act in place, with all the features Republicans detest.

“We tried our hardest,” said Representative Michael C. Burgess of Texas, chairman of the Energy and Commerce subcommittee on health. “There were people who were not interested in solving the problem. They win today.”

“The Freedom Caucus wins,” he added. “They get Obamacare forever.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Jennifer Steinhauer, Glenn Thrush and Emmarie Huetteman contributed reporting.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mYBXRC
EmailFacebook

In Dropping Vote, President Swallowed Need for a Showdown

By JULIE HIRSCHFELD DAVIS and MAGGIE HABERMAN

President Trump preparing to speak from the Oval Office after a House vote on the health care bill was canceled because it didn’t have the support to pass. Al Drago/The New York Times
WASHINGTON — When Speaker Paul D. Ryan arrived at the White House on Friday to inform President Trump that the health care bill he had made his first major legislative push could not pass, Mr. Trump had one reaction: He wanted revenge.

Furious at rebellious Republicans who refused to back the measure, Mr. Trump demanded that defectors cast “no” votes for all to see — even if it meant the measure’s high-profile defeat, broadcast live on television.

But over a lunch of chicken, brussels sprouts and twice-baked potatoes in the Oval Office, Mr. Ryan pleaded with Mr. Trump to reconsider.

A loss could do lasting political damage to Republicans who supported the contentious bill, Mr. Ryan argued, especially those in competitive districts who were vulnerable to primary challenges. It would do nothing to isolate or punish the Freedom Caucus, the conservative faction that had resisted the measure all along, he added.

And it could alienate rank-and-file Republicans needed to push through other challenging initiatives in the weeks to come, including an increase in the debt ceiling, a sweeping tax cut and the president’s promised $1 trillion infrastructure package.

Mr. Trump remained unconvinced, but by midafternoon, armed with vote counts showing that the measure lacked a majority to pass, the president called the speaker to agree: You should pull the bill.

The collapse of the measure dealt Mr. Trump — a professed master dealmaker who campaigned as an agent of change — a remarkable setback in his young presidency, threatening to sap his influence and imperil his ambitious agenda. It also highlighted the importance of a pairing that will shape the Trump era: a president inexperienced in the complexities of politics and uninterested in the nuance of policy, paired with a vulnerable speaker struggling to corral competing coalitions within the Republican Party.

With repeal and replace now a hollow vow, Mr. Trump’s anger at the defiant members of the Freedom Caucus was undiminished. But trying to put the best possible face on a major defeat late Friday afternoon, he confined his public criticism to Democrats.

“When you get zero from the other side — they let us down because they’re hurting the people,” Mr. Trump said in a telephone interview shortly after he had agreed to pull the measure. Asked whether he was worried the loss would hurt Republicans, he said, “I’ll let you know in a year.”

The demise of the American Health Care Act played out in a tense 24 hours that White House and congressional officials said proved a political education for Mr. Trump and his top advisers on the promise and peril of governing, even with unified Republican control. This account is based on government officials who were present during the last-minute negotiations and who spoke on the condition of anonymity.

“We all learned a lot,” Mr. Trump told reporters on Friday afternoon. “We learned a lot about loyalty, and we learned a lot about the vote-getting process.”

“Certainly for me, it was a very interesting experience,” he added.

Mr. Trump, who initially had little involvement in crafting the health care bill, became more deeply engaged in recent weeks, promoting it at rallies outside Washington and holding meetings in the West Wing with conservative and moderate coalitions whose support was crucial to its passage.

But he made little secret of his ambivalence about addressing the issue — “I would have loved to have put it first, I’ll be honest,” Mr. Trump said of tax reform in Nashville last week — yet he told aides he believed the measure could not pass without a push from him.

By Thursday afternoon, just hours before a scheduled vote, it had become clear that his efforts — along with those of Vice President Mike Pence and other senior White House officials — had fallen short. At a meeting in Mr. Ryan’s office in the Capitol with members of the recalcitrant Freedom Caucus, top White House officials laid out the changes they had made at the group’s behest, including stripping it of federal standards for benefits that must be provided in health insurance policies, including maternity and wellness care.

Caucus members began outlining still more changes they needed to see before they could support the bill, angering Mr. Ryan and Mr. Trump’s aides. Stephen K. Bannon, the president’s chief strategist, and Mick Mulvaney, his budget director, told the group that the White House was finished negotiating and that the president wanted to know its position on the bill — yes or no.

Called on in turn to state their positions, several members refused. As tensions rose, Representative Mark Meadows of North Carolina said that he spoke for the group and that they were not ready to commit. That meant the votes would not be there.

Mr. Ryan postponed the vote and called an evening meeting of House Republicans in the basement of the Capitol. Lawmakers munched on Chick-fil-A takeout as Mr. Mulvaney delivered the president’s ultimatum on the health measure: Fall in line behind it or accept that former President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act would be the law of the land. The speaker emerged and told reporters there would be a vote in the morning, rushing away from the news cameras as he was asked if Republicans had the votes.

In a 45-minute telephone call Thursday evening between Mr. Trump and Mr. Ryan, the two commiserated over the demands of the caucus and strategized over the prospects for a vote on Friday.

Even as the two spoke, some of Mr. Trump’s advisers were privately expressing frustration with Mr. Ryan, arguing that he had badly misjudged the situation and misled the president into tackling health care before a tax overhaul.

The meeting with the Freedom Caucus had prompted a realization by Mr. Trump and his inner circle about how the group operated, and that offering it policy concessions would not win its support.

By Friday, Mr. Trump was out for blood, eager to call the bluff of the Freedom Caucus and savage it if the health bill went down in defeat. Mr. Bannon and Marc Short, Mr. Trump’s legislative affairs director, both favored holding the vote.

But Mr. Ryan, reluctant to suffer an embarrassing loss or to ask his fellow Republicans to take what could be a politically perilous vote on a measure that had little chance of passing, argued vigorously against it.

White House officials still believed as much as half of the 40-member Freedom Caucus could be pressured into supporting the bill, and Mr. Bannon demanded to see a confidential vote-count list that demonstrated otherwise. The numbers were grim, and Mr. Trump called Mr. Ryan to acquiesce into calling off the vote.

“I don’t blame him for a thing, I really don’t,” Mr. Trump said of Mr. Ryan in the interview on Friday. “Look, he tried. He tried very hard.”

But one close adviser said that Mr. Trump, who hates looking weak or any form of embarrassment in public, was stewing.

One ally of the president, however, said that he had learned from the process. Christopher Ruddy, the chief executive of Newsmax Media and a longtime friend of Mr. Trump, said he thought it was a “blessing in disguise” that the bill had died.

“This bill was a political bullet aimed at the president and congressional Republicans running for office next year,” he said. “On future legislation, he won’t make the same mistakes.”

As Mr. Trump reflected on the health care debacle, the president who had predicted during the campaign that he would win so often that people would become “sick of winning” insisted that he was at peace with the day’s results.

“I’m not disappointed,” he said in the interview. “If I were, I wouldn’t be calling you.”

He said that he was moving on to overhauling the tax system and trade, describing the experience with the health bill as not that different from some of his negotiations as a real-estate developer.

But he acknowledged that he was pleased to have it all behind him.

“It’s enough already,” he said.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.


Correction: March 24, 2017

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misspelled the given name of President Trump’s chief strategist. He is Stephen K. Bannon, not Steven.

Glenn Thrush and Jennifer Steinhauer contributed reporting.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nOjR9j
EmailFacebook

Unbending Faction Deals Blow to Its Own Party as Bill Falters

By JENNIFER STEINHAUER
The Freedom Caucus chairman, Mark Meadows of North Carolina, center, in the Capitol on Friday. J. Scott Applewhite/Associated Press
WASHINGTON — At the end of the long day, the alliance of conservative ideologues who once shut down the government over President Barack Obama’s health care law could not find the will to repeal it.

Since the Tea Party wave of 2010 that swept House Republicans into power, a raucous, intransigent and loosely aligned group of lawmakers known as the Freedom Caucus — most from heavily Republican districts — has often landed a punch to its own party’s face.

Friday’s defeat of the Republican leadership’s bill to repeal the Affordable Care Act was a return to form, handing an immense defeat to President Trump and embarrassing Speaker Paul D. Ryan in his own House. It also challenged the veracity of their long-held claims that a Republican president was all they needed to get big things accomplished.

The most important question for Republicans now is whether the members of the Freedom Caucus will find themselves newly emboldened in ways that may bring the new president more defeats — or whether Mr. Ryan will do what former Speaker John A. Boehner could not, and find a way to shred their influence for good.

“If you are defined by your opposition to leadership, it’s hard to be part of a governing coalition,” said Alex Conant, a onetime aide to Senator Marco Rubio, the Florida Republican who was once a Tea Party star. “Their opposition to Trump’s health care bill should surprise nobody who’s paid attention for the last six years. Even the world’s best negotiator can’t make a deal with someone who never compromises.”

But the Freedom Caucus has never been about compromise. In 2011, it picked a huge, costly fight over Planned Parenthood. In 2013, it orchestrated a government shutdown over funding for the health care law. Then, in its most striking move, it deposed Mr. Boehner in 2015. The common thread: It has continuously been an adversary of legislation itself.

But after years of opposing power — both in the White House, which was occupied by a Democrat, and in the leadership of their own party — the conservatives were offered a chance to negotiate directly with the president and his budget director, a former Freedom Caucus member, over the bill to replace the Affordable Care Act. The members pushed and pushed Mr. Trump to the far right edges of policy, just as they have done for years on other bills. But they still could not get to “yes,” and therefore became part owners of the expansive health law they were trying to undo.

“They made the perfect the enemy of the good,” said Representative Roger Marshall, Republican of Kansas. “I don’t know how they can go back home and tell people they voted to keep Obamacare, voted to keep funding Planned Parenthood.”

Indeed, members of the Freedom Caucus — which is supported by outside conservative groups — have often claimed the mantle of pure conservatism, but their tactics have been seen by many in their party as uniformly counterproductive.

Time after time, they undermined Republican leaders’ efforts to secure wins for the conservative cause by overreaching and demanding the impossible.

They have anointed Representative Mark Meadows of North Carolina as their leader and principal spokesman. But they occasionally get help from three senators sympathetic to their cause: Ted Cruz of Texas, Rand Paul of Kentucky and Mike Lee of Utah.

At critical times, House conservatives have forced their party to make deals with Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic leader — an idea anathema to most Republicans, who would seethe.

This time, by negotiating with Mr. Trump on the complex issue of health care, a measure whose complexity he did not seem to fully grasp, they moved an already contentious bill further and further to the right, eliminating too many benefits to keep moderate and other conservative members on board. Even Mr. Trump was said to be taken aback by their attempts to remove things Republicans have long promised to keep, like health insurance benefits for children up to 26 years old.

Given that the House and Senate majorities were built on a promise to repeal and replace Mr. Obama’s signature health care law, many lawmakers fear electoral repercussions. “It is painfully ironic that members from safe, conservative congressional districts who can’t ever quite seem to get to ‘yes’ make it harder to enact good, conservative public policy like repealing Obamacare,” said Michael Steel, a Republican strategist and former aide to Mr. Boehner.

This seemed lost on many Freedom Caucus members on Friday. “Part of the legislative process is working with people who have different ideas,” said Representative Justin Amash, Republican of Michigan. “This process from the beginning wasn’t designed to do that.”

Now, health care has become such a partisan issue that voters seem to have little expectation that their elected officials will do much to solve the problem.

“I believe we should have more attention paid to the centrists in both parties,” said Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Republican of Florida, one of the early moderate defectors of the bill. “Instead of showing all this attention to three or four people who never vote for anything, let’s do an American health plan, not a Republican or Democrat one.”

Mr. Ryan and Mr. Trump offered up a cheerful patina on what many in Washington viewed as an unmitigated failure, one brought on by a group that had brought down the speaker, shuttered the government and needlessly delayed previous legislation with no significant accomplishments to call its own.

And a new test will come soon as Republicans contemplate an overhaul of the tax code, as the fate of the health care bill throws into doubt whether any major legislation can pass in this climate.

To mitigate this issue, Mr. Ryan will be charged with building the sort of outside coalitions that did not exist for the failed health care bill, which was opposed by doctors, nurses, hospitals, disease groups and conservative political action committees.

“There are lessons from this debate that will be applied to upcoming issues like tax reform, infrastructure and financial reform,” said Ken Spain, who served as the National Republican Congressional Committee’s spokesman in 2010. “Debates are won and lost in the districts and states, not in the cloakrooms of Congress.”

“Winning legislative battles today,” he said, “requires more of an outside-in approach.”

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nOpl3X
EmailFacebook

U.S. Investigates as Iraqis Claim Strikes Killed Up to 200 Civilians

By TIM ARANGO and HELENE COOPER
Residents in western Mosul on Friday carried the bodies of people killed in fighting between Iraqi security forces and the Islamic State. Scores of residents are reported to have been killed by coalition airstrikes in the area this month. Felipe Dana/Associated Press
BAGHDAD — The American-led military coalition in Iraq said Friday that it was investigating reports that scores of civilians — perhaps as many as 200, residents said — had been killed in recent American airstrikes in Mosul, the northern Iraqi city at the center of an offensive to drive out the Islamic State.

If confirmed, the series of airstrikes would rank among the highest civilian death tolls in an American air mission since the United States went to war in Iraq in 2003. And the reports of civilian deaths in Mosul came immediately after two recent incidents in Syria, where the coalition is also battling the Islamic State from the air, in which activists and local residents said dozens of civilians had been killed.

Taken together, the surge of reported civilian deaths raised questions about whether once-strict rules of engagement meant to minimize civilian casualties were being relaxed under the Trump administration, which has vowed to fight the Islamic State more aggressively.

American military officials insisted on Friday that the rules of engagement had not changed. They acknowledged, however, that American airstrikes in Syria and Iraq had been heavier in an effort to press the Islamic State on multiple fronts.

Col. John J. Thomas, a spokesman for the United States Central Command, said that the military was seeking to determine whether the explosion in Mosul might have been prompted by an American or coalition airstrike, or was a bomb or booby trap placed by the Islamic State.

A man is helped after identifying the body of a relative who died in the Mosul Jidideh neighborhood. Residents there said airstrikes hit a number of houses in recent days, killing dozens, including children. Felipe Dana/Associated Press
“It’s a complicated question, and we’ve literally had people working nonstop throughout the night to understand it,” Colonel Thomas said in an interview. He said the explosion and the reasons behind it had “gotten attention at the highest level.”

As to who was responsible, he said, “at the moment, the answer is: We don’t know.”

Iraqi officers, though, say they know exactly what happened: Maj. Gen. Maan al-Saadi, a commander of the Iraqi special forces, said that the civilian deaths were a result of a coalition airstrike that his men had called in, to take out snipers on the roofs of three houses in a neighborhood called Mosul Jidideh. General Saadi said the special forces were unaware that the houses’ basements were filled with civilians.

“After the bombing we were surprised by the civilian victims,” the general said, “and I think it was a trap by ISIS to stop the bombing operations and turn public opinion against us.”

General Saadi said he had demanded that the coalition pause its air campaign to assess what happened and to take stricter measures to prevent more civilian victims. Another Iraqi special forces officer, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the subject, said that there had been a noticeable relaxing of the coalition’s rules of engagement since President Trump took office.

A man exits a house in Mosul damaged in the fighting. Felipe Dana/Associated Press
Before, Iraqi officers were highly critical of the Obama administration’s rules, saying that many requests for airstrikes were denied because of the risk that civilians would be hurt. Now, the officer said, it has become much easier to call in airstrikes.

Some American military officials had also chafed at what they viewed as long and onerous White House procedures for approving strikes under the Obama administration. Mr. Trump has indicated that he is more inclined to delegate authority for launching strikes to the Pentagon and commanders in the field.

This is the second time this week that the military has opened an investigation into civilian deaths reported to have been caused by American airstrikes. On Tuesday, Central Command said it was investigating an American airstrike in Syria on March 16 that officials said killed dozens of Qaeda operatives at a meeting place that activists and local residents maintain was part of a religious complex.

While Defense Department officials acknowledged that the building was near a mosque, they called it an “Al Qaeda meeting site” in Jina, in Aleppo Province.

Pentagon officials said that intelligence had indicated that Al Qaeda used the partly constructed community meeting hall as a gathering place and as a place to educate and indoctrinate fighters.

A prayer service for a man who friends and relatives say was killed by a sniper on the western side of Mosul. Felipe Dana/Associated Press
But the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said that 49 people had been killed in what the group described as a massacre of civilians who were undergoing religious instruction in an assembly hall and dining area for worshipers. The group has produced photos taken at the site after the strike that show a black sign outside a still-standing adjoining structure that identified it as part of the Omar ibn al-Khatab mosque.

Chris Woods, director of Airwars, a nonprofit group that monitors civilian deaths from coalition airstrikes in Syria and Iraq, said that in March alone the number of reported civilian fatalities has shot up to 1,058, from 465 in December, the last full month of the Obama administration.

“We don’t know whether that’s a reflection of the increased tempo of the campaign or whether it reflects changes in the rules of engagement,” he said. But, he added, the recent spike in numbers “does suggest something has shifted.”

American military officials said that what has shifted is that the Iraqi military, backed by the American-led coalition, is in the middle of its biggest fight so far — the battle to retake Mosul from the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

In particular, the campaign for West Mosul has involved block-by-block fighting in an urban environment.

“There’s been no loosening of the rules of engagement,” said Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman. “There are three major offensives going on right now, at the same time,” he said, citing the battle for West Mosul; the encirclement of Raqqa, Syria, the Islamic State’s de facto capital; and the fight for the Tabqa Dam in Syria.

Captain Davis said that the investigation was looking into whether Islamic State fighters were responsible for the explosion in Mosul, or if an airstrike set something off.

“There are other people on the battlefield, too,” he said. “It’s close quarters.”

American officials said that even the timing of the strike was still in question. Col. Joseph E. Scrocca, a spokesman for the American-led command in Baghdad, said in a statement Friday that the strike under investigation happened between March 17 and Thursday.

The civilian death toll in Mosul was already widely described as heavy on account of Islamic State snipers and bombs, and intensified urban fighting in which artillery has been used. But there have been numerous reports from witnesses, including rescue workers and residents fleeing the fighting, about bodies being buried under rubble after heavy air bombardment.

Many of the reports centered on the Mosul Jidideh neighborhood, where residents said airstrikes hit a number of houses in recent days, killing dozens, including many children.

Capt. Ahmed Nuri, a soldier with Iraq’s elite counterterrorism forces, who work closely with the American military and call in airstrikes, said on Thursday that his men, facing heavy sniper fire, helped collect five bodies from the rubble of a destroyed home. He said four of them were brothers — named Ali, Omar, Khalid and Saad — whose bodies were delivered to their grieving mother.

The mother, Captain Nuri said, identified the fifth dead body as that of an Islamic State sniper who had been firing at advancing Iraqi forces from the roof of their house.

Local officials have reacted with outrage at the latest civilian deaths, warning that they will make it more difficult to fully take the city, and will alienate civilians still in Mosul, whom the Iraqi government is counting on for assistance.

“The repeated mistakes will make the mission to liberate Mosul from Daesh harder, and will push civilians still living under Daesh to be uncooperative with the security forces,” said Abdulsattar Alhabu, the mayor of Mosul, using the Arabic acronym for the Islamic State.

Mr. Alhabu estimated that at least 200 civilians had been killed in airstrikes in recent days in Mosul.


Correction: March 25, 2017

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misidentified Chris Woods, who said reported civilian fatalities from coalition airstrikes had increased. He is the director of Airwars, not the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights.

Follow Tim Arango @tarangoNYT and Helene Cooper @helenecooper on Twitter.

Falih Hassan contributed reporting from Baghdad, and an employee of The New York Times from Mosul, Iraq.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2n04sy8
EmailFacebook

For Many, College Is the Goal; The Problem Is Getting There

By ANEMONA HARTOCOLLIS
TaTy’Terria Gary in her entrepreneurship class at Topeka High School last fall. Like many working-class students, she struggled with the college admissions process. Christopher Smith for The New York Times
TOPEKA, Kan. — She was a blur of motion — leading the school step-dance team, working long hours after school at a beauty products store, mentoring younger students and caring for her siblings. So TaTy’Terria Gary, a senior at Topeka High School, had little time last fall to study for the ACT college admission test.

She was crushed when she scored below the threshold for admission to some local universities. She saw her dreams of being the first in her family to go to college and becoming a gynecologist turning to dust.

“I was angry at myself,” she said. “I had underestimated the test.”

College is the great leveler of American life, and the great divider, too. College graduates typically earn more money, are more satisfied with their jobs and are less likely to be on public assistance than people with only high school degrees. Students understand this; the aspiration to go to college is now almost universal.

Getting there, though, is another matter.

Nate Triggs on his way from Topeka High School to his internship as a mechanic at Westar Energy last week. Christopher Smith for The New York Times
For young people with college-educated parents, the path to higher education may be stressful, but there is a road map. If their standardized test scores are too low, they can pay for a prep course; if their essay is lackluster, they can hire a writing coach. No one will be the wiser. If they can’t decide which college is the “best fit,” they can visit. When they are tempted to give up, their parents will push them on.

But for many working-class students, like TaTy and most of her classmates at Topeka High, there is no money for test prep or essay help. The alternatives to higher education — joining the military, working for $13 an hour at the local factory or getting a cheaper, faster trade-school certificate — are alluring. The cost of college may seem formidable.

At a basic level, many of these students simply lack the knowledge of how to manage the increasingly complex college applications process.

“They know that everybody goes to college, and they don’t know what that means,” said Robert D. Putnam, a public policy professor at Harvard, whose book “Our Kids” looks at the widening class divisions in America. “They’re going down that path without anybody holding their hands.”

Among the barriers are less quantifiable psychological ones. Students who are not exposed to a college-going culture have trouble even imagining themselves at a university, beyond, perhaps, a community college close to home.

“You need someone to tell you at the critical moment, ‘You can do this,’” said Harold O. Levy, executive director of the Jack Kent Cooke Foundation, which gives scholarships to low-income students.

For students like TaTy and her classmates, the difference between going to college and not going is often small gestures or luck — placement in a college prep program, a mentor’s interest, a parent’s encouragement, their own steely perseverance.

“My mother wants me to go out of state,” TaTy said. “She feels like Topeka is not a good place for people who have dreams.”

Over the last few months, TaTy and two of her classmates, Nathan Triggs and Zachary Shaner, grappled with decisions about college and made their way out of childhood, through money worries, broken families and peer pressure, into the next phase of their lives. Each followed a different path, but in combination, they tell a story of students at an average school in the middle of America trying to find a better future.

NATE

College Is a Backup

A dove hurtles out of the cedar trees, but Nate Triggs, in camouflage vest and cowboy boots, cradles his Mossberg shotgun and lets it fly. The dove is borderline out of range, he said. He would have to be lucky.

Like the dove, college feels borderline out of reach to Nate too. He gets conflicting signals from home and school about whether it’s even a good idea.

His parents split before he was born. On weekends, he lives on his father’s farm outside of Holton, a 45-minute drive from Topeka, where he lives during the week with his mother and goes to Topeka High. There is little doubt of his academic ambition. When he was in seventh grade, he eagerly signed up for a college prep program.

This school year, the college prep teacher urged the students to expand their horizons, to make lists of “best fit,” “stretch” and “safety” colleges and to think of what they would major in. Nate thought maybe he would pursue architecture. He had built a hip roof worthy of Frank Lloyd Wright, though he had never heard of him.

Or maybe he would study wildlife management. He was upset by the misuse of hunting to garner trophies, not food.

“I’m just trying to play my options,” he said early in his senior year. “I don’t know what I want to do yet.”

His school is a Depression-era temple to education, with Gothic arches and a carillon tower. But the college-going culture is far from pervasive.

More than 60 percent of the 1,800 students are low-income. Only half the senior class of about 400 took the ACT college admission test in the 2015-16 school year, and only 30 students took Advanced Placement tests, a measure of college readiness (though many more took the classes).

About half of Topeka High’s senior class went on to college in 2014, according to the latest state data.

“All of the counselors firmly believe the philosophy that college is great,” a counselor said at senior parent information night, even while pushing trade school programs in phlebotomy and cosmetology. “We want to get your kids there if that’s where they want to go. But it’s not the only option, and sometimes it’s not even the best option.”

At another assembly, a business development group promoted jobs paying $13 to $19 an hour at companies like Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Frito-Lay, Goodyear and the chocolate manufacturer Mars Inc.

Nate’s mother, a secretary, fondly remembers high school French and ceramics. She thinks it would be “awesome” for Nate to go to college, but, never having been, she has left the process to him. His father, a handyman who also never got beyond high school, encouraged Nate to make his own decisions.

His older brother, Ethan, dropped out of high school and has been homeless on and off for two years. His foster grandfather suggested the military as a place to explore his options. Most of his friends in Holton are going to technical school.

During his senior year, Nate took a construction job to pay for his cellphone and gas. His grades dropped — from B to D in AP government, his favorite class, and from B to F in physics. He never took the ACT.

“I’m pretty done with high school,” he said.

One night at a Mexican restaurant, a boy from Holton sneered, “Your pants are too short.” “I felt like fighting that guy,” Nate said. His mother flashed him a warning look. “I didn’t say I was going to fight him,” Nate said. “I said I felt like fighting him.”

Concerned, the Topeka High principal, Rebecca Morrisey, recommended him for an internship at Westar Energy. He is in heaven, earning union wage as a fleet mechanic after school.

The internship has concentrated his thinking, for now: trade school, like his Holton friends. “I want to get into what I want to actually do,” he said. “College is my, like, Plan B.”

ZAC

A Guidance Counselor’s Help

When the marching band received dress uniform hats last fall, Zachary Shaner was truant. So he rummaged around the band room and found an old hat that he hoped would work. It didn’t. It was the wrong color and it had a broken black feather plume on top.

That was Zac, the familiar character in many high schools: the brilliant student who does not live up to his potential.

In elementary school, he was steered into the gifted track by his high IQ, but once in high school, he often chose easy courses to skate through. But he found a vocation in music.

He plays bass, guitar, piano and saxophone — self-taught — and has progressed from covers of Johnny Cash to composing his own songs, drenched with teenage anomie, and performing at the Boobie Trap, a dive bar.

Zac was a mostly A student until his junior year, when he took a job bagging groceries at Mike’s IGA so he could buy musical equipment. His grades plunged, along with his hopes to go to college to become a sound engineer.

His home life is hard. His mother, Charla Shaner, has a degree in early childhood education but depends on disability and child support payments to pay the bills. His older brother, Chris, 20, was too depressed to apply to college. Ms. Shaner’s ex-husband, retired from the military, lives in another city and communicates with Zac mainly through birthday cards.

But Zac had one advantage: the interest of his guidance counselor, Harry M. Peterson Jr., a debonair accordion player in his 70s, with an office full of pennants from places like Kenyon, Rice and Emory.

Mr. Peterson believed in Zac and urged him to aim high. Zac scored 27, in the 86th percentile, on the ACT without taking a review course. He seemed like a good fit for a small but selective college, like Grinnell or Oberlin, that would value his creative spark and could offer scholarship money.

Zac had never heard of either. “My spark is intimidated,” he said early in his senior year.

He told everyone he was going to Washburn University, the local public university, because he thought he could get close to a free ride there and live at home. But Mr. Peterson’s encouragement sank in.

Without telling anyone, Zac applied to the University of Kansas just before the Nov. 1 scholarship deadline. He was admitted and automatically awarded $1,000 a year based on his high grade point average and ACT score. Elated, he decided to major in film.

“As a musician, I’ve loved some of the soundtracks even more than the films,” he said, listing John Williams, Hans Zimmer, Howard Shore, Danny Elfman and James Horner as movie composers he admired.

In December, he found out that as a high-achieving, poor student from Kansas, he qualified for grants of about $10,900 a year, enough to cover tuition and fees.

“Wow,” Zac said.

He could double his scholarship to $2,000 a year if he took the ACT again and scored just one point higher.

But he thought he had done as well as he could.

TATY

When Luck Meets Persistence

TaTy’s mother was 17 when she gave birth to TaTy, an event that dashed her own college aspirations. So she encouraged her daughter to follow a different path. Her guidance had an effect.

For TaTy’s 16th birthday, she asked for a “purity ring,” a silver ring symbolizing a pledge that she will abstain from sex before marriage, or until she is ready. She has focused her energies on her schooling and getting into college.

She and her mother, Tracy, felt that staying in Kansas would hold her back, but she had little idea where to go. She searched for colleges online. Her mother drove her to Ohio State, and she considered Oklahoma Baptist University because she liked the idea of a spiritual element in her education.

But when she met Jennifer Stark Fry, a private college counselor from Wichita, she began to think more strategically.

Ms. Fry read about TaTy, Nate and Zac in dispatches I wrote about them last fall and offered to help all three get into college. Only TaTy responded.

Knowing TaTy wanted to be a doctor, Ms. Fry took her and her mother on a tour of Newman University, a Catholic university in Wichita, Kan., with a strong pre-med program. (And she reminded TaTy to send thank-you notes.)

The Newman admission officers were impressed by TaTy’s 3.7 grade point average, but she had scored an incongruously low 16 on the ACT, and their threshold was 18.

Newman urged her to take the test again in December.

The test fee was waived because TaTy was so poor; her mother works at a group home for troubled children, and her father is absent, in and out of jail. But she would have to pay $52.50 for her last-minute registration and a date change. She had 24 hours to come up with the money, and her paycheck was not due for a week.

She was about to give up when a local real estate broker, Helen Crow, came to the rescue. Her own daughter had gone from Topeka High to Stanford, and she could not stomach the thought of a future derailed for want of so little money.

In a second lucky break, Sean Bird, a dean at Washburn University who knew TaTy’s mother, arranged for her to take practice tests in the university library.

After two weeks of practice, TaTy raised her score to 18, a huge leap, to the 39th percentile from the 26th.

Newman accepted her on Jan. 5, her 18th birthday. “Feeling accomplished,” she wrote on her Facebook page.

She received $26,400 in scholarship and grant money off the $37,382 annual cost of tuition, room, board and fees. Though generous, it fit with a common practice of colleges, offering less money than students need.

She would have to pay for the rest through a combination of loans and work study or cash. For a middle-class family, roughly $40,000 in debt might be a molehill. For TaTy, whose financial aid form listed parental income of less than $20,000 a year, it is a mountain. Still, she is not giving up.

She said yes to Newman and is looking for more scholarship money.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nKK1tt
EmailFacebook

Bao Bao Takes a Bow in Her Chinese Home

By KAROLINE KAN
After 30 days of quarantine, the American-born Bao Bao appeared in public for the first time on Friday at her new home: the Dujiangyan Panda Base in the southwestern Chinese province of Sichuan. Gilles Sabrié for The New York Times
CHENGDU, China — Strange food. Unintelligible natives. These are just some of the things that Bao Bao, the 3-year-old panda from the National Zoo in Washington, has grappled with since moving to China last month. But the culture shock is fading, her handlers say, as she settles into the land of her ancestors.

On Friday, after 30 days of quarantine, Bao Bao made her first public appearance at the Dujiangyan base of the China Conservation and Research Center for the Giant Panda in Sichuan Province.

Bao Bao’s new life in China has been not easy, according to Tang Cheng, one of her keepers during her quarantine. Over the past month, she has had to learn Mandarin with a Sichuan accent and get used to the local fare — including wowotou, or steamed cornbread buns, in place of the biscuits she was used to.

By now, Bao Bao can understand some commands in Chinese, including “stand up” and “sit down,” Mr. Tang said.

Mr. Tang was selected to work with Bao Bao in part because he speaks English as well as Chinese, an important skill to help haigui, or overseas returned, pandas to adapt to their new homes.

Over the last month, Bao Bao has had to learn Mandarin with a Sichuan accent and adjust to the local food, one of her keepers said. Gilles Sabrié for The New York Times
At the ceremony on Friday, several United States diplomats and dozens of reporters and other guests were on hand to greet Bao Bao. Although they were clearly excited to see her for the first time, waving their hands and shouting her name to get her attention, Bao Bao seemed unimpressed. She spent most of the time sitting in her outdoor playground, munching on bamboo. From time to time, she would examine the rubber balls and tires hanging near her brick enclosure.

According to Mr. Tang, Bao Bao spent her first few days in China overcoming jet lag and by now has settled into a routine: four to six meals a day, of bamboo, carrots, apples and wowotou. At first she did not like the wowotou and tended to throw it away.

By now, though, Mr. Tang said, “she is adapting well to her new environment,” and has gained more than four pounds.

Bao Bao is not the first American-born panda to face the challenges of a new life. In November, when Mei Lun and Mei Huan, the first surviving panda twins to have been born in the United States, at Zoo Atlanta, came to China, the Chinese news media reported that they, too, had difficulties with the local language and food.

According to the conservation and research center, 25 pandas have been born abroad since the 1990s, when China set up panda breeding programs in collaboration with 17 zoos in 12 countries. Of these, 18 have survived. By agreement, pandas provided by China are considered loans, and their offspring must be sent to China before their fourth birthday in preparation for breeding.

As reporters and other guests gathered around Bao Bao, she calmly strolled about her playground or munched on bamboo. Gilles Sabrié for The New York Times
Bao Bao was born on Aug. 23, 2013, to Mei Xiang and Tian Tian, two pandas on loan to the National Zoo. Her older brother, Tai Shan, who was born in 2005 and sent to China in 2010, is now her neighbor at the Dujiangyan base. A younger brother, Bei Bei, was born in 2015 and is still in Washington.

A 2016 report by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature put the total number of giant pandas around 2,060. While that is up from the 1,596 counted in a 2000-4 census, the health of the population depends on continued conservation efforts. Each panda has a mission to spread the genes, and Bao Bao is no exception. Once she reaches sexual maturity, around 5 or 6 years old, she will acquire a boyfriend.

“When Bao Bao gets to that age, we will arrange for her to meet many young males,’’ Mr. Tang said, “and their relationship will be based on love.”

Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.

Follow Karoline Kan on Twitter @KarolineCQKan.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nLnr3S
EmailFacebook

NEXT SECTION: INTERNATIONAL

PREVIOUS SECTION: FRONT PAGE
INTERNATIONAL
Bao Bao Takes a Bow in Her Chinese Home


By KAROLINE KAN


After 30 days of quarantine, the American-born Bao Bao appeared in public for the first time on Friday at her new home: the Dujiangyan Panda Base in the southwestern Chinese province of Sichuan. Gilles Sabrié for The New York Times
CHENGDU, China — Strange food. Unintelligible natives. These are just some of the things that Bao Bao, the 3-year-old panda from the National Zoo in Washington, has grappled with since moving to China last month. But the culture shock is fading, her handlers say, as she settles into the land of her ancestors.


On Friday, after 30 days of quarantine, Bao Bao made her first public appearance at the Dujiangyan base of the China Conservation and Research Center for the Giant Panda in Sichuan Province.


Bao Bao’s new life in China has been not easy, according to Tang Cheng, one of her keepers during her quarantine. Over the past month, she has had to learn Mandarin with a Sichuan accent and get used to the local fare — including wowotou, or steamed cornbread buns, in place of the biscuits she was used to.


By now, Bao Bao can understand some commands in Chinese, including “stand up” and “sit down,” Mr. Tang said.


Mr. Tang was selected to work with Bao Bao in part because he speaks English as well as Chinese, an important skill to help haigui, or overseas returned, pandas to adapt to their new homes.




Over the last month, Bao Bao has had to learn Mandarin with a Sichuan accent and adjust to the local food, one of her keepers said. Gilles Sabrié for The New York Times
At the ceremony on Friday, several United States diplomats and dozens of reporters and other guests were on hand to greet Bao Bao. Although they were clearly excited to see her for the first time, waving their hands and shouting her name to get her attention, Bao Bao seemed unimpressed. She spent most of the time sitting in her outdoor playground, munching on bamboo. From time to time, she would examine the rubber balls and tires hanging near her brick enclosure.


According to Mr. Tang, Bao Bao spent her first few days in China overcoming jet lag and by now has settled into a routine: four to six meals a day, of bamboo, carrots, apples and wowotou. At first she did not like the wowotou and tended to throw it away.


By now, though, Mr. Tang said, “she is adapting well to her new environment,” and has gained more than four pounds.


Bao Bao is not the first American-born panda to face the challenges of a new life. In November, when Mei Lun and Mei Huan, the first surviving panda twins to have been born in the United States, at Zoo Atlanta, came to China, the Chinese news media reported that they, too, had difficulties with the local language and food.


According to the conservation and research center, 25 pandas have been born abroad since the 1990s, when China set up panda breeding programs in collaboration with 17 zoos in 12 countries. Of these, 18 have survived. By agreement, pandas provided by China are considered loans, and their offspring must be sent to China before their fourth birthday in preparation for breeding.




As reporters and other guests gathered around Bao Bao, she calmly strolled about her playground or munched on bamboo. Gilles Sabrié for The New York Times
Bao Bao was born on Aug. 23, 2013, to Mei Xiang and Tian Tian, two pandas on loan to the National Zoo. Her older brother, Tai Shan, who was born in 2005 and sent to China in 2010, is now her neighbor at the Dujiangyan base. A younger brother, Bei Bei, was born in 2015 and is still in Washington.


A 2016 report by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature put the total number of giant pandas around 2,060. While that is up from the 1,596 counted in a 2000-4 census, the health of the population depends on continued conservation efforts. Each panda has a mission to spread the genes, and Bao Bao is no exception. Once she reaches sexual maturity, around 5 or 6 years old, she will acquire a boyfriend.


“When Bao Bao gets to that age, we will arrange for her to meet many young males,’’ Mr. Tang said, “and their relationship will be based on love.”


Get news and analysis from Asia and around the world delivered to your inbox every day with the Today’s Headlines: Asian Morning newsletter. Sign up here.


Follow Karoline Kan on Twitter @KarolineCQKan.


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nLnr3S
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL
Le Pen Meets With Putin, Highlighting France’s Possible Tilt Toward Russia


By ADAM NOSSITER
The French presidential candidate Marine Le Pen, left, and President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia in Moscow on Friday. Pool photo by Mikhail Klimentyev
PARIS — Marine Le Pen, the French far right’s presidential candidate, has never hidden her admiration for President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, and on Friday she met with him in the Kremlin.


Russian television broadcast images of Ms. Le Pen, gesticulating energetically across the table from a disengaged-looking Mr. Putin. Earlier, she called for “developing relations” with Russia and “cooperation” in antiterrorism. Both were nods to her presidential campaign platform, which advocates closer ties with Mr. Putin, friendliness toward President Trump and rejection of the European Union.


The meeting highlighted the potential for a general realignment of relations with Russia, even at a time when it has been accused of meddling in Western elections through computer hacking and the promotion of fake news, sowing alarm on both sides of the Atlantic.


The Trump administration has shown itself sympathetic to Moscow, to the extent that pre-election contacts between the two sides are being investigated in the United States. In a crucial election year in Europe, campaigns are now peppered with parties and candidates that could sharply redirect ties with Moscow.


Chancellor Angela Merkel’s election-year challengers in Germany, on the left and the far right, tilt more easily toward Russia. The Five Star Movement in Italy, which presents a rising challenge to the political establishment if elections are held there this year, does as well.


Then there is Ms. Le Pen, who Russian television reported had met earlier with parliamentary deputies in Moscow, while calling for the lifting of sanctions against Russia for its land grab in Ukraine.


Mr. Putin’s Russia has long been a source of aid for Ms. Le Pen’s National Front. In 2014, her party received a $9.7 million loan from a Russian bank; Ms. Le Pen said French banks were shunning her party. The loan nonetheless drew condemnation from the governing Socialists as an unsavory example of foreign financing for a French political party.


Denying any quid pro quo, the National Front was the only French party to approve of Russia’s annexation of Crimea, and its officials have regularly called for the lifting of Western sanctions against Russia. National Front officials regularly visit Russia. From its earliest origins, the party has not been reticent about displaying an affinity for authoritarian leaders.


“I won’t hide that, in a certain sense, I admire Vladimir Putin,” Ms. Le Pen was quoted as saying in the Russian paper Kommersant in 2011. “He makes mistakes, but who doesn’t? The situation in Russia is not easy.”


Her foreign policy positions in the 2017 campaign — Ms. Le Pen is favored to win in a first round of voting on April 23 but lose in the second round two weeks later — have a clear pro-Russian tilt. Aides have praised Ms. Le Pen’s ideological closeness to both Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin, saying she is well placed to form alliances with both.


“She’s the only one who can speak with both Putin and Trump,” one of Ms. Le Pen’s top lieutenants, Jean-Lin Lacapelle, said in an interview here two weeks ago.


“She’s got a privileged relationship with Putin,” said Mr. Lacapelle, a longtime friend of Ms. Le Pen. “You can’t be isolated when you’ve got both Putin and Trump on your side.”


Asked whether the Le Pen campaign was in touch with Trump officials, Mr. Lacapelle would say only, “There are lots of things going on.”


In a fiercely nationalist speech to diplomats in Paris last month, Ms. Le Pen criticized the European Union, which she wants France to leave, for having “mistreated” Russia, calling Russia an “indispensable interlocutor” in the Middle East.


Ms. Le Pen spoke of wanting to “anchor” Russia to Europe, even as she heaped scorn on the European Union, which she said was “facing contrariwise to the rest of the world.”


“Everywhere, globalization is in retreat,” Ms. Le Pen told a group of bemused diplomats in a gilded hall in the fashionable 16th Arrondissement. “The Europe of peoples will be constructed against globalist dissolution,” she said. “I celebrate the renaissance of the European peoples.”


She “saluted” what she called Mr. Trump’s “realism” and his “desire for change,” while quoting approvingly Charles de Gaulle’s dictum that states have “no friends, but only interests.”


She insisted that the “singularity of the world’s populations is not soluble merely in the market,” while denouncing the “lies of globalization and liberalism.”


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mZubXt
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL | THE SATURDAY PROFILE
The Jihadi Who Turned to Jesus, Surprising None More Than Himself


By PATRICK KINGSLEY
Bashir Mohammad, 25, fought on the front lines of the Syrian civil war for Jabhat al-Nusra, an offshoot of Al Qaeda, less than four years ago. Patrick Kingsley/The New York Times
ISTANBUL — When 22 Christian refugees gathered in the basement of an apartment in Istanbul early on a recent Sunday afternoon, it was quickly clear that this was no ordinary prayer meeting. Several of them had Islamic names. There was an Abdelrahman and even a couple of Mohammads. Strangest of all, they jokingly referred to their host — one of the two Mohammads — as an irhabi. A terrorist.


If Bashir Mohammad took the joke well, it was because there was once some truth to it. Today, Mr. Mohammad, 25, has a cross on his wall and invites other recent converts to weekly Bible readings in his purple-walled living room. Less than four years ago, however, he says he fought on the front lines of the Syrian civil war for the Nusra Front, an offshoot of Al Qaeda. He is, he says, a jihadi who turned to Jesus.


It is a transition that has surprised everyone, not least of all himself. Four years ago, Mr. Mohammad tells me, “Frankly I would have slaughtered anyone who suggested it.” Not only have his beliefs changed, but his temperament has, too. Today, his wife, Hevin Rashid, confirms, with a hint of understatement, that he is “much better to be around.”


The conversion of Muslim refugees to Christianity is not a new phenomenon, particularly in majority-Christian countries. Converts sometimes stand accused of trying to enhance their chances of asylum by making it dangerous to deport them back to places with a history of Islamist persecution.


Mr. Mohammad’s particular experience, however, does not fit easily into this narrative. He lives in a majority-Muslim country, has little interest in seeking asylum in the West and treads an unlikely path followed by few former jihadis.


Mr. Mohammad wears a cross and has one on the wall of his living room, where other recent converts join him for weekly Bible readings. Patrick Kingsley/The New York Times
His is a story that began in a Kurdish part of northern Syria, Afrin, where he grew up in a Muslim family. Mr. Mohammad flirted with extremism in his teens. His cousin took him to hear jihadist preachers as a 15-year-old, and he adhered to some of the most extreme interpretations of Islam, “even the ones you haven’t heard of.” But when war broke out in Syria, after the country’s 2011 uprising, Mr. Mohammad initially joined the secular Kurdish forces in their fight for autonomy.


Mr. Mohammad’s subsequent ideological journey rarely made complete sense. But by his account, he became traumatized by the deaths he witnessed on the front line, which in turn re-energized his interest in the extremist versions of Islam that he had learned about as a teenager.


“When I saw all these dead bodies,” he said, “it made me believe all these things they said in the lectures. It made me seek the greatness of religion.” Or, at least, his violent interpretations of that religion.


When a friend invited him to defect in summer 2012 to the Nusra Front, a group that seeks to establish an extremist state, Mr. Mohammad readily agreed. As a Nusra fighter, he continued to witness extreme brutality. His colleagues executed several captives by crushing them with a bulldozer. Another prisoner was forced to drink several liters of water after his genitals were tied shut with string.


This time, however, Nusra’s propaganda made the violence seem tolerable. “They used to tell us these people were the enemies of God,” Mr. Mohammad said, “and so I looked on these executions positively.”


When I first met Mr. Mohammad, in his basement, I guessed at none of this. In fact, I was there to observe one of his guests, a Yazidi who had converted two months earlier. Mr. Mohammad seemed to be the group’s glue and behaved as though he had been born and bred a Christian.


It was Mr. Mohammad who led the first prayers and chants. (“People who have fled their homes,” began one, “God bring them safety.”) And it was he who distributed the coffee afterward. His calm poise was jogged only when his guests jokingly referred to him as the irhabi, a sobriquet that sent a sheepish smile across his youthful face.


In his previous life, however, Mr. Mohammad said he was an angry man whose temper frightened his relatives. When he briefly returned home for his family’s Kurdish New Year celebrations in March 2013, Mr. Mohammad was repulsed by what he saw as blasphemous celebrations, whose origins lay outside the Islamic tradition.


Indoctrinated by his months with Nusra, he spent his leave in isolation with Ms. Rashid, who was then his fiancée. Both she and his parents tried to persuade him not to return to the front line, but he ignored them.


But back at the front, Mr. Mohammad finally began to question Nusra’s motives. Scanning government territory through his binoculars, he says he saw Syrian government soldiers executing a line of prisoners with a bulldozer and concluded there was little difference between their behavior and that of his colleagues.


Disenchanted, he risked execution himself by deserting Nusra, and returning home to Afrin. “I went to Nusra in search of my God,” he said. “But after I saw Muslims killing Muslims, I realized there was something wrong.”


The next year, he and his wife fled the war entirely, leaving for Istanbul and joining around 2.5 million other Syrians in exile in Turkey. Still a zealous Muslim, Mr. Mohammad prayed so loudly that his upstairs neighbors complained. “They used to ask me, ‘When are you going to turn into a prophet?’” He still required Ms. Rashid to cover her hair and neck, and planned for her to wear a niqab, or full-face covering.


It was nevertheless Ms. Rashid herself who unwittingly prompted her husband’s rejection of Islam. In early 2015, she fell seriously ill. As her health worsened, Mr. Mohammad described her condition in a phone call with his cousin Ahmad — the same cousin who had taken him to jihadist lectures as a teenager. Ahmad was now living in Canada and, in a move that shocked Mr. Mohammad, had converted to Christianity.


An enthusiastic convert, Ahmad asked Mr. Mohammad to place his telephone close to Ms. Rashid, so that his prayer group could sing and pray for her health. Horrified, Mr. Mohammad initially refused, since he had been taught to find Christianity repellent. But he was also desperate, and eventually he gave in.


When Ms. Rashid improved within a few days, Mr. Mohammad ascribed it to his cousin’s intervention. Intrigued, he then began to entertain a sacrilegious thought. He asked his cousin to recommend a Christian preacher in Istanbul who might introduce him to the religion. He was put in touch with Eimad Brim, a missionary from an evangelical group based in Jordan called the Good Shepherd, who agreed to meet with him.


Mr. Brim said Mr. Mohammad was quickly persuaded by the benefits of a conversion, despite the lethal danger in which it would place him. “It was Bashir who was looking for Eimad,” said Mr. Brim, who also confirmed other parts of Mr. Mohammad’s narrative. “It was easy.”


Exactly why he sought solace in Christianity, rather than a more mainstream version of Islam, no one can quite explain. Reading the Bible, Mr. Mohammad claimed, made him calmer than reading the Quran. The churches he attended, Mr. Mohammad said, made him feel more welcome than the neighborhood mosques. In his personal view, Christian prayers were more generous than Muslim ones. But these are subjective claims, and many would reject the characterization of Islam as a less benign religion, much as they would reject Nusra’s extremist interpretation of it.


For Mr. Mohammad and Ms. Rashid, perhaps it was their dreams that sealed their conversion. As the couple began to consider leaving Islam, Ms. Rashid said she dreamed of a biblical figure who used heavenly powers to divide the waters of the sea, which Mr. Mohammad interpreted as a sign of encouragement from Jesus. Then, Mr. Mohammad himself dreamed Jesus had given him some chickpeas. The pair felt loved. “There’s a big gap between the god I used to worship and the one I worship now,” Mr. Mohammad said. “We used to worship in fear. Now everything has changed.”


For Mr. Mohammad, all this has nevertheless come at a high price. His rejection of Islam makes him a target for his fundamentalist former allies and he fears they will one day catch up with him. If they do, however, he reckons he now has the greatest protection of all.


“I trust,” he says, “in God.”


Eiad Abdullatif contributed reporting.


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mZyrq8
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL
Divided E.U. Turns 60 With Little to Celebrate


By STEVEN ERLANGER
Piccadilly Circus in London after the Brexit vote in June. When European Union leaders meet to celebrate the 60th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome on Saturday, Britain will not be in attendance. Adam Ferguson for The New York Times
LONDON — Sixty years after the treaty that led to its founding, the European Union is under fundamental stress — divided and divergent, anxious that it no longer represents the future but the past, and that it may be incapable of handling the serious challenges of this already-turbulent century.


As European leaders gather in Rome on Saturday to celebrate the anniversary of the Treaty of Rome, Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain will be missing since her country has voted to leave — the most concrete evidence that the European Union is no longer the obvious answer to the Continent’s many challenges.


Born 60 years ago in optimism that cooperation in trade would benefit all, the principle binding a union that has expanded from six nations to 28 has been solidarity — that difficulties would be faced together, that cooperation would bring the convergence of politics and economics and “an ever closer union.”


But much of that conviction has turned out to be magical thinking. Somewhere along the line, the European Union lost its way.


Many place the pivotal moment at the crossroads it encountered when the Berlin Wall fell and the Soviet empire collapsed. Shortly after, the conversations were all about how to “broaden” by adding new members, as Washington and London wanted, and also “deepen” cooperation through new institutions. The bloc stumbled into trying both, imperiling growth and unity, even as it antagonized Russia.


“What was at the heart of European values and principles was this simple idea of solidarity, that we would help those countries with difficulties and stick together through challenging times,” said Pierre Vimont, a former French ambassador and senior European Union official.


“It seems to have gotten lost when we enlarged to the new states of Central and Eastern Europe, and we saw it in our treatment of Greece, too. There is a sense of harshness and division, a lack of solidarity. And if that simple idea is not there anymore, then we’re in big trouble. If we don’t have that, what’s the use of going forward?”


The main question facing the European Union, 60 years later, is one of reinvigoration. How can it recapture the optimism, restore the solidarity and reassure its core members while delivering economic opportunity to its poorer members and to its youth?


That will not be easy. Today the enlarged European Union is poorer, more diverse and less united than ever. Its troubles are so numerous and structural that they threaten to undo the bloc.


Britain, its second-largest economy and one of two nuclear powers, has voted to leave. The countries of Central Europe are flirting with authoritarianism and Russia. Candidate countries like Turkey and Serbia have lost enthusiasm. Even core countries, like France, Germany and the Netherlands, are dealing with strong populist movements that are fiercely anti-European Union.


For many, the European Union no longer stands for democracy and a better future, but instead a hindrance to national identity and economic opportunity. It has created a powerful transnational bureaucracy that by its nature becomes enamored of bureaucratic solutions, creating an ethos of faceless clerks and late-night crisis meetings of national leaders, most of whom worry more about perceptions at home than solving the problems of their neighbors.


Just this week, Poland and Greece were threatening, at least, to block the Rome Declaration meant to support the bloc’s renewed aspirations. Poland remains concerned the newer members outside the euro will be marginalized in the future, and suggested that the London attacks were linked to lax European Union migration policies. Greece wants more explicit reference to the protection of workers, even as its debt crisis festers. The disunity threatens to weaken Europe’s hand as Brexit negotiations approach next Wednesday.


Not all the problems the bloc faces are of its own making, but they need to be faced nonetheless. Mr. Vimont, now a visiting fellow at Carnegie Europe, sees the new strains as reflective of a more individualistic society, which has also become selfish and nationalistic.


With the crises of migration, Greece and the British exit, which has been a body blow to the union, and the antagonism of the Polish and Hungarian governments toward migrants and basic freedoms, he said, “there is animosity and a lack of generosity, and a loss of the willingness among countries to find a way out when there is disagreement.”


Stefan Lehne, a former senior Austrian diplomat and European Union official, says that 60 years after its founding treaty, the bloc “has lost much of its original appeal.” Writing together with Heather Grabbe, director of the Open Society European Policy Institute, he sees “the European mind closing amid a host of real, exaggerated and imagined fears.”


“We overestimated the transformational effect of the European Union, both in new states but also in the old ones,” Mr. Lehne said in an interview. “And for the euro, too — the economic convergence assumption underlying the euro was flawed. It’s not happening.”


The strains from enlargement have inevitably changed the bloc, but are unlikely to destroy it, Mr. Lehne said. But the assumption that democracy can be gradually transferred to the European level has also proved to be illusory.


The democratic deficit and underestimation of the power of identity may be “the biggest flaws in the enterprise,” Mr. Lehne said, especially with the bureaucratization of Brussels. But those are not the only problems, the others being logical tributaries.


Assumptions about the inevitability of a single market, which is a kind of religion for the bloc, as well as a common currency, the euro, were similarly flawed. Commitments to open borders have been outpaced by security challenges in an age of terrorism. The promises of prosperity for all have been undone as globalization sank cherished local industries while buoying bankers on oceans of wealth that flowed across borders. So people cling ever more tightly to sovereignty.


Hubert Védrine, the former French foreign minister, sees Brexit as merely a symptom of these larger problems — the false promises of ever-increasing wealth and quality of life for all of “social Europe, which will never happen.”


Overregulation of everyday life from unelected bureaucrats, whether it’s bananas or electric vacuum cleaners or light bulbs, is its own problem, too, Mr. Védrine noted, and not something the European Commission, the bloc’s bureaucracy, was intended to do.


Now there is “an electoral insurrection” against globalism, in both Europe and the United States, and unhappiness with “a European system that wishes to continue endlessly, that does not listen, that does not wish to correct anything, that takes no vote into consideration, and if there is a referendum that does not give the desired result, there is a new one presented,” Mr. Védrine said.


“If we do not manage to correct the system,” he added, “the European project will end.”


Mr. Védrine cautions not to overly focus on the far right. “There are a lot of people who disagree with what Europe has become, and they are not for Marine Le Pen and the National Front,” he said.


But he, like many, see a new flexibility and a new tolerance for a multispeed or multitier Europe as the best way of retaining cohesion, rather than pushing all members to fit into the same structures — the euro being the most obvious example.


But even if the competing needs of European Union members can be finessed, the external pressures on the bloc are mounting, too, not least from Russia and the Trump administration, which seems to tolerate NATO while disparaging the multilateral model that is the European Union.


The European project is troubled by uncertainty, with the disruption of Brexit underestimated, Russia poking at democratic unity and “this huge question mark” from Washington, said Stefano Stefanini, a former Italian ambassador who is a consultant in Brussels.


“The West is fighting among itself while competitors like China, Russia and Turkey are rising,” he said.


Both Mr. Stefanini and Simon Tilford, the deputy director of the Center for European Reform, are struck by the complacency in Brussels, with rhetoric about the possibility of a multitier Europe lagging far behind the reality of division and competition.


“In Brussels, they see a couple of quarters of economic growth as a sign that everything is well,” Mr. Tilford said. “The first sign of relative improvement is an excuse to sound defensive and complacent.”


“But can you return some powers to member states without abandoning the core project?” Mr. Tilford asked. “Can European identity be reconciled with large amounts of migration?”


Rosy as the declarations on Saturday in Rome are likely to be, they will not provide those answers.


Follow Steven Erlanger on Twitter @StevenErlanger.


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2n01euM
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL
Russian Agent Behind Killing, Ukraine Says


By THE NEW YORK TIMES
The body of Denis N. Voronenkov was carried away by forensic experts in downtown Kiev on Thursday after he was killed. Andrew Kravchenko/European Pressphoto Agency
The assassin who gunned down a prominent Russian opposition figure on a sidewalk in the Ukrainian capital of Kiev was identified by Ukrainian officials on Friday as a 28-year-old Russian agent.


Anton Gerashchenko, an adviser to the country’s interior minister, identified the agent as Pavel Parshov, who had undergone “a special course at a school for saboteurs,” he said in a Facebook post. The gunman was himself grievously wounded by a bodyguard for the target, Denis N. Voronenkov, and subsequently died in the hospital. The allegation was immediately dismissed by Dmitri S. Peskov, the spokesman for the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, as “absurd.”


Mr. Voronenkov was a member of the Russian Parliament before defecting to Ukraine last year with his wife, Maria Maksakova, also a politician. He had offered to testify for the prosecution in a criminal case against Viktor F. Yanukovych, the former Russia-aligned president of Ukraine who was driven from office by street demonstrators in 2014. He promised to deliver an insider’s account of the Kremlin’s deliberations and actions during the annexation of Crimea the same year.


A former prosecutor before joining Parliament, Mr. Voronenkov had socialized with people in Mr. Putin’s circle, including Vladislav Surkov, a political adviser to Mr. Putin who attended Mr. Voronenkov’s wedding.


The Ukrainian National Guard released a statement saying that Mr. Parshov had enlisted and served from 2015 to 2016, before being dismissed for breach of contract. His exact offense was not specified.


Critics and opponents of Mr. Putin and his Kremlin cronies have been assassinated in a variety of ways over the years, often in spectacular fashion so as to send a message, Kremlin watchers say. The most celebrated was the poisoning of Alexander V. Litvinenko with a rare and deadly radioactive isotope, polonium 210, administered in a drink in the Millennium Hotel in London in 2006.


When the prominent opposition figure Boris Y. Nemtsov was murdered in 2015, his body fell on the sidewalk of a bridge with the Kremlin and the domes of St. Basil’s Cathedral as a backdrop.


Sometimes the killings are more prosaic. Numerous potential witnesses to the death of Sergei L. Magnitsky, a lawyer who died of neglect in a Russian prison, have disappeared, been poisoned or suffered “heart attacks” that were later found to be the result of ingesting a rare Chinese herb.


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2n0jfsS
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL
London Assailant Led Quiet Life, Until Dark Side Broke Through


By KATRIN BENNHOLD, KIMIKO de FREYTAS-TAMURA and DAN BILEFSKY
Khalid Masood Metropolitan Police, via Associated Press
BIRMINGHAM, England — He described himself as “friendly and approachable.” He had a degree in economics, and said he was a good listener.


Adrian Russell Ajao, the man who drove a car into pedestrians in the shadow of Big Ben and then killed a police officer with a knife in Britain’s worst act of terrorism since 2005, and who called himself Khalid Masood after converting to Islam in his late 30s, was a 52-year-old husband and father.


Prone to violent outbursts as a younger man, he had led a quiet life in recent years, usually attracting notice from the neighbors only when he washed his car in the driveway or mowed his lawn. Most afternoons he would pick up his two youngest children from primary school in a quiet suburban part of Birmingham, in the West Midlands of England.


Occasionally, though, a darker side broke through. “When he spoke about religion,” said a neighbor who did not want to be identified for fear of reprisals, “he suddenly was a different man,” describing in those moments a fierce and uncompromising anger about the treatment of Muslims.


As a portrait began to emerge of Mr. Masood, investigators were trying to piece together how a former English teacher with a penchant for bodybuilding — who had used half a dozen aliases, spent two years living in Saudi Arabia and served two jail sentences — had been set on the path of extremism, and whether he acted alone.


Floral tributes outside the Houses of Parliament in London on Friday. Jack Taylor/Getty Images
On Friday, the police provided some hints that answers would be forthcoming, announcing two “significant” arrests. But by the end of the day, seven of the 11 people arrested since Wednesday had been released with no further police action. Two women have been freed on bail. Two men, both from Birmingham, remained in custody and were being questioned as part of the investigation.


The police were still searching five addresses, had concluded 16 searches and were sifting through 2,700 seized items, including huge amounts of computer data and video footage taken by passers-by on Westminster Bridge at the time of the attack, said Mark Rowley, assistant commissioner of the Metropolitan Police.


Mr. Rowley said the death toll from the attack had risen to four as Leslie Rhodes, 75, from the Streatham area of south London, succumbed to his injuries. The victims included at least 50 wounded and came from around the world, a “poignant reminder” Mr. Rowley said, of the global reach of the assault.


Only minutes before Mr. Masood pressed down on the accelerator at 2:41 p.m. on Wednesday as he mounted the sidewalk on Westminster Bridge, his WhatsApp account on his phone was active, security officials said. Whether he was receiving direction from someone at home or overseas, or just saying goodbye to his wife, is not yet known.


The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack on Thursday, but the extent of the group’s connections to the assailant were unclear, and some officials doubted a link. “They adopted him, he was not one of their soldiers,” said Nazir Afzal, until 2015 the chief prosecutor for northwest England, who grew up in Birmingham. Mr. Masood does not appear to have made a public pledge of allegiance to Islamists before or during his attack.


In some respects, Mr. Masood, born on Dec. 25, 1964, in Kent, southeastern England, shared many traits with the militant Islamists who have staged attacks recently in European cities.


Like those in Berlin and Nice, France, last year, he used a vehicle to mow people down. And he had a substantial criminal record before his transition to Islamic militancy: First convicted as an 18-year-old for criminal damage, he went to prison twice for inflicting grievous bodily harm.


He appears to exemplify another trend as well. According to statistics cited by Mr. Afzal, one-third of those convicted of Islamist-related offenses in Britain from 2001 to 2010 were converts to Islam, who account for only 1 percent of the Muslim community.


But in other ways, his profile is highly unusual, officials said, not least with regards to his age.


“Most people we prosecute are second-generation British immigrants and they are young,” Mr. Afzal said. “I can’t think of anyone in their 40s, never mind their 50s.”


“Then again,” he added, “he came to his version of Islam late.”


In the Birmingham neighborhood where Mr. Masood lived with his family until last December, Marjoli Gajecka, 26, described a quiet and outwardly observant Muslim who wore a beard, a skullcap and mostly cream-colored Islamic robes. His wife, also in a robe, and his two daughters wore head scarves.


“He was a very calm person, a family person, I think a good father as he was taking kids to school, bringing them back, coming back from shopping with his wife,” said Ms. Gajecka, whose mother lives two doors down from the Masoods’ former home.


He was helpful, too, she said. When her mother’s partner needed a parking space, Mr. Masood offered his driveway. Another time, when another neighbor needed a ride, he gave her one.


Investigators are working on the assumption that Mr. Masood converted to Islam in one of Britain’s prisons, some of them known as incubators of radical Islam, particularly during the years he was incarcerated. He first landed in prison in 2000, after a judge sentenced him, then 35 and known as Adrian Elms, to nearly three years for slashing a cafe owner’s face after an argument.


At the time, Mr. Masood, who is mixed race, was living in Northiam, a village in southeast England. He was known to take a drink, and displayed no outward signs of piety. He left his victim, Piers Mott, with a three-inch gash on his left cheek that required 20 stitches. News reports during the trial at Hove Crown Court said the argument between the two men was racially tinged.


Prosecutors told the court that Mr. Masood had drunk four pints of beer before the attack and had waved his knife and shouted abuse during the assault.


The judge sentenced Mr. Masood to two years in prison for wounding and nine months for criminal damage. During the sentencing, he acknowledged that Mr. Masood had tried to better himself by obtaining a university degree and creating a successful business, but said he had no option but to impose the jail terms.


“The reality is that you lost your temper and went beyond the bounds of what is reasonable,” the judge said.


Mr. Masood never seemed to recover from the crime and its aftermath, which eventually fractured his family and made him an outcast in his old neighborhood, according to reports in the news media. Less than three years later he was back in jail after a second violent episode, in which he stabbed a man in the nose.


It was during this second stint, in Wayland prison in the Norfolk area in eastern England, a larger jail with a substantial Muslim population, that investigators believe he converted to Islam. He might have come into contact with Islamists there, but the picture remains hazy.


“We don’t yet know how he became radicalized and who radicalized him, even though we are working on the assumption that he converted to Islam in prison,” Mr. Afzal said.


In 2004, shortly after being released from his second stint in prison, Mr. Masood remarried a Muslim woman — identified in the British news media as Farzana Malik. Between 2005 and 2009, he had two one-year stints teaching English in Jidda, Saudi Arabia. According to the Saudi Embassy in London, he visited again in March 2015 for the pilgrimage to Mecca.


The run-ins with law enforcement stopped, though he was questioned at some point by MI5, Britain’s domestic intelligence service. But he was considered “peripheral” to a larger investigation and soon fell off the radar, officials said.


So far investigators do not know what triggered this week’s attacks, executed on the first anniversary of the Brussels bombings last year. Some believe it is unlikely that Mr. Masood acted entirely on his own.


“There is no such thing as a lone wolf,” said Khalid Mahmood, who represents one constituency in Birmingham in Parliament. “Maybe he was a single attacker,” he said, but he must have had “a mentor or a guide,” first to inspire him and then to make him follow through.


Around Christmas, a moving van arrived outside Mr. Masood’s house. Ms. Gajecka, the neighbor, saw him and his wife pack up and leave.


While it remains unclear where his wife and children went, Mr. Masood is believed to have moved to a rundown apartment building on Hagley Road that residents say was once a brothel. The street, in central Birmingham, is lined with empty pizza and kebab shops. Drug addicts shoot up in the parking lot.


This, police said, is where Mr. Masood is believed to have stayed as recently as last weekend, before renting a car and driving to the seaside resort of Brighton on Tuesday, the day before the attack, seemingly in good spirits.


Sabeur Toumi, the owner of the Preston Park Hotel there, said that Mr. Masood had spent his final night at the establishment, staying in Room 228. In an interview with Sky News, Mr. Toumi described Mr. Masood as a returning guest who was “very friendly, laughing and joking.”


“My staff is very upset at the moment,” Mr. Toumi added. “It is very shocking because these days you don’t know who are the bad ones and the good ones.”


Stephen Castle, Michael Wolgelenter and Adrian Gatton contributed reporting.


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nKKJqW
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL
School Trips From Toronto to the U.S. Will Cease


By CRAIG S. SMITH
A protest against the revised travel ban outside the Customs and Border Protection headquarters in Washington. Concerned that students might be turned away at the border, Toronto schools have stopped planning field trips to the United States. Al Drago/The New York Times
Toronto schools have stopped planning field trips to the United States, citing concerns that some students may be turned away at the border in the wake of President Trump’s latest travel ban and the American immigration authorities’ newly implemented “extreme vetting” procedures.


At the same time, many Canadian universities are seeing a sharp increase in international student applications while foreign applications to many colleges in the United States have declined.


The field trip decision by the Toronto District School Board, the largest board in the country, was the latest disruption in travel from Canada to the United States as the Trump administration tightens the borders. Canada’s Girl Guides and the Greater Essex County District School Board in Windsor, Ontario, earlier suspended trips across the border given the uncertainties surrounding the ban.


“We don’t want to put our students in the position of traveling down to the border with their friends and classmates on a trip and then being told they cannot enter the U.S. for no legitimate reason,” said Ryan Bird, a spokesman for the Toronto board.


He said that 25 trips involving about 900 students would go forward because they were already booked, but that no new trips would be planned for either students or staff members until further notice. The district normally sends dozens of school groups to the United States each year.


Mr. Bird said that should anyone on the trips already booked be turned away at the border, the trip would be canceled. If the board hears that this is happening repeatedly, or if the executive order is eventually implemented, all booked trips will be canceled for the remainder of the year.


Mr. Bird noted that the Toronto district, with about 246,000 students in 584 schools, was one of the most diverse in the world, with students from “every corner of the globe, including the six countries referenced in the order.”


Mr. Trump’s latest executive order would place a 90-day ban on citizens from Syria, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan and Yemen from entering the country unless they have valid visas. The order has been suspended pending court challenges in several states.


The divergent political climate between the United States of Mr. Trump and the Canada of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau is throwing other trends into high relief.


While many American universities are seeing a drop in applications from international students, international student applications continue to climb at Canadian universities, including in some cases a sharp rise from the United States.


Applications from the United States to Ryerson University in Toronto are up sharply, rising 82 percent for the 12 months through March from the same period last year. The university has seen a 25 percent increase in international applications over all, said Marisa Modeski, Ryerson’s assistant director of student recruitment.


“With respect to Trump, we see that as a potential influencer for application growth, but there are so many positive influencers that people need to pay attention to,” Ms. Modeski said. She cited the cost differential — Canadian universities are less expensive than many American universities, and the Canadian dollar is weaker than the American one.


The University of Toronto said it had seen a stunning 80 percent leap in applications from the United States in the 12-month period ending in March, compared with the same period a year earlier.


Ted Sargent, international vice president at the university, said the quality of the institution and job prospects for its graduates were the top two attractions. But he says students have told him that a third reason is the country’s “inclusive environment.”


“A lot of students are attracted by that ethos,” he said.


The University of Toronto’s trends are the opposite of those found among 250 American colleges surveyed last month by the American Association of Collegiate Registrars and Admissions Officers.


Among the colleges that responded, 39 percent reported a drop in international applications for the fall, 35 percent reported an increase and 26 percent reported no change in applicant numbers.


The study did not give comparable figures for the previous year, but international student enrollment in the United States has been steadily growing in recent years, reaching a record one million students for the first time during the 2015-16 academic year.


Many respondents reported growing concern among prospective students and their families about the harsher climate in the United States for foreigners.


While the survey reported 26 percent of United States schools surveyed saw a decline in applications from India and 39 percent saw a decline in those from the Middle East, the University of Toronto has seen a 60 percent increase in applications from India and a 54 percent increase from the United Arab Emirates alone.


McGill University in Montreal said it had a 21 percent increase in undergraduate applicants from the United States, with a 25 percent increase in international undergraduate applicants from everywhere else. That compares with a 13 percent increase in international undergraduate applicants from March 2015 to March 2016.


“The number of international (specifically overseas) applicants has been growing somewhat over the last few years, although not to the same extent as in 2017,” Kathleen Massey, McGill’s executive director of enrollment, said in an email.


She said that Canadian universities, including McGill, had become increasingly active in recruiting overseas, but added that the changing political landscape in the United States, Britain and elsewhere may be playing a part.


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2n0uXUc
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL
Online Sleuths Rush to Identify London Attacker, and Get It Wrong


By MARK SCOTT
Abu Izzadeen being escorted by Hungarian police officers in 2015. He was falsely accused online of being the assailant in a terrorist attack in London on Wednesday. Ferenc Isza/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
Hours after the terrorist attack in London, online sleuths thought they had identified the assailant.


In Twitter posts, Facebook messages and a live British television news program, people pointed to Abu Izzadeen, a radical British cleric who was imprisoned last year for running afoul of British terrorism rules. His photos were shared on the internet. His Wikipedia page was updated with the information.


But they were wrong.


Not only was Mr. Izzadeen not the assailant in Wednesday’s attack, but he was also in a British prison, according to his lawyer, Tanveer Qureshi.


“He was not responsible for these terrible and unjustified attacks,” Mr. Qureshi said by email.


Pedestrians cross the Westminster Bridge on Thursday, a day after a terrorist attack there. Carl Court/Getty Images
The real assailant was identified on Thursday as Khalid Masood, 52, a British-born man who had been previously investigated for potential ties to violent extremism and had a lengthy criminal record.


The public naming of Mr. Izzadeen was a troubling reminder that fact and fiction can be hard to separate in a breaking news event.


In this rapid-fire world, confusion and hearsay can spread quickly on social networks like Facebook and Twitter. Traditional media, in a hypercompetitive 24-7 news environment, can rush to report fresh details. All of this has made for a media morass in which fake news, hate speech and unverified information may overrun basic facts.


That has been the case during elections in the United States, Europe and elsewhere, as governments and voters have faced a flood of misconceptions and falsehoods. Erroneous claims also have abounded in previous terrorist attacks, including the Boston bombing in 2013 when several people were incorrectly named as possible suspects.


Before British officials identified Mr. Masood on Thursday, they urged media outlets to avoid publishing the names of any suspects in the attack. But the pleas did little to stop the misinformation online, particularly in the hours immediately after the event.


A Russian news site published a fake photo of the suspect. Twitter posted false reports of potential victims. And Donald J. Trump Jr. reposted a news report that had incorrectly named Mr. Izzadeen as the attacker.


In the digital era, people increasingly seek real-time coverage, readily supplied by all manner of sources, credible and otherwise. This frenetic online environment has fostered the perfect space for rumormongering, creating a need for fast and accurate ways to counter false narratives.


“There’s more misinformation out there than there was in the past,” said Rasmus Nielsen, director of research at the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism at the University of Oxford. “It’s cheaper to distribute, and more people are trying to do it.”


In this new landscape, Facebook, Google and other digital players have been criticized for not doing enough to clamp down on fake news, extremist speech, and reports from other unverified sources. Major advertisers, including AT&T and Johnson & Johnson, recently pulled their ads from YouTube and other Google properties amid concerns that the company was not doing enough to prevent brands from appearing next to offensive material including hate speech.


Online giants have updated their policies and tweaked their algorithms to try to block false reports, while financing fact-checking programs at traditional media organizations and tech start-ups. Sites like Snopes have also helped fill the void, by trying to debunk internet myths.


“Any claim should be treated with caution until verifiable including on social media,” said Tom Hegarty of Full Fact, a British nonprofit organization that checks the veracity of published material.


Like many false reports, much of the misinformation surrounding Mr. Izzadeen turned on a kernel of truth, namely his criminal history.


He is well known to the British security services, having been convicted on terrorism-related charges in 2008 and serving four and a half years in prison.


He was arrested again in 2014 with Anjem Choudary, an Islamist activist. After being released from prison the next year, he was deported to Britain from Hungary after violating a police-ordered travel ban.


With accusations swirling that Mr. Izzadeen was involved in the London attack, some online voices jumped to his defense to debunk the falsehoods.


Dominic Casciani, a reporter with the British Broadcasting Corporation, posted a message on Twitter saying that Mr. Izzadeen was not the attacker. Others quoted Mr. Izzadeen’s lawyer confirming that he was in prison.


On Mr. Izzadeen’s Wikipedia page, a spat ensued among the site’s volunteer moderators.


Four hours after the fatal assault, an anonymous moderator updated the online entry to include the attack, the website’s revision records said. After that, rival Wikipedia moderators vied to include or delete the allegations, with the page changing minute by minute.


By late Wednesday — after the editor of Channel 4 News, the British television program that had incorrectly named Mr. Izzadeen as the attacker, issued an apology — the Wikipedia entry was eventually scrubbed of the false allegations. LoudLizard, a moderator of the site, updated the webpage eight hours after the assault, saying that Mr. Izzadeen had been “wrongfully named as involved in Westminster attack.”


Wikipedia’s moderators were again quick on Thursday, this time relying on official sources. Within minutes of the British police identifying Mr. Masood as the London attacker, they had updated the entry for the terroristic event, naming him as the perpetrator.


Follow Mark Scott on Twitter @markscott82.


Sewell Chan contributed reporting from London.


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nJRw4b
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL
Imprisoned and Fearful, Duterte Critic Speaks Out


By FELIPE VILLAMOR
Senator Leila de Lima was brought to a court in Quezon City, the Philippines, last week. She was arrested in February on charges she said were false, and has been in jail since. Romeo Ranoco/Reuters
MANILA — In a prison surrounded by tall walls topped with razor wire, past three security checkpoints, inside a tiny, sweltering cell with bare walls and bars on the high windows, the Philippines’ most famous prisoner sits at a small desk furiously writing a letter.


Senator Leila de Lima, 57, one of President Rodrigo Duterte’s most prominent critics, was sent here last month on charges of taking payoffs from drug traffickers, charges she says are false and part of an effort to keep her quiet.


Ms. de Lima, a lawyer and a grandmother, may be a prisoner at Camp Crame, inside the National Police Headquarters in Quezon City, north of Manila, but silent is one thing she won’t be.


“When I get to see something in the papers that I feel like reacting to, I take it down and write,” she said. “My annotated handwritten dispatches from Crame,” she jokingly called her letters.


They are handwritten because she is allowed neither laptop, nor phone. She has had weekly visits with her staff and has tried to carry on her Senate business, but she cannot vote on bills because she cannot be present on the Senate floor.


Ms. de Lima in her cell in Camp Crame, inside the National Police Headquarters in Quezon City, on Thursday. Despite being denied a laptop or a phone, she tries to keep up with her Senate business. Felipe Villamor
She passes the time by reading. Her desk is stacked with paperback novels and books on politics. She takes walks in the courtyard, where there is a broken basketball hoop.


And she cries.


“When I am about to sleep, that’s the worst time for me,” she said in an interview in her cell this week. “That’s when emotions creep in. I think about my family. I think about my home. I think about my own bed in my comfortable room.”


At dusk, after the visitors are shooed out, the staff is gone for the night and she is locked in her cell, her only company is a stray cat that wanders the compound.


Still, she has no regrets, she says, “because I have done nothing wrong.”


Supporters of Ms. de Lima during her arraignment last week. Ms. de Lima says she is the victim of political persecution by President Rodrigo Duterte, whom she has long criticized. Rolex Dela Pena/European Pressphoto Agency
“She added, “I am innocent, and this is political persecution, plain and simple.”


Ms. de Lima has a long history with Mr. Duterte. As chairwoman of the Philippine Commission on Human Rights in 2008, she led an investigation into extrajudicial killings in Davao City, where Mr. Duterte was mayor. She later became secretary of justice, and last May, she was elected to the Senate the same day Mr. Duterte was elected president.


Since then, as chairwoman of the Senate Justice Committee, she has investigated Mr. Duterte’s antidrug campaign, in which thousands of suspects have been killed by the police and vigilantes.


She traces her jailing to the day last September when her committee heard testimony from Edgar Matobato, a professed hit man who said he worked for the Davao Death Squad, which he said Mr. Duterte created and commanded.


Mr. Duterte did not respond to the accusations but immediately assailed Ms. de Lima, accusing her of having an affair with her driver, of making a sex tape that he claimed to have watched, and of taking millions of dollars in cash from convicted drug traffickers to finance her senatorial campaign.


Ms. de Lima has traced her jailing to the day last September when her committee heard explosive testimony from Edgar Matobato, a professed hit man who said he worked for the Davao Death Squad, which he said was created by Mr. Duterte. Bullit Marquez/Associated Press
The last charge became the basis of a criminal case, and she was arrested in February.


Since then, another death squad member, Arthur Lascañas, has come forward and corroborated Mr. Matobato’s testimony.


The senator says her lawyers are arguing an appeal before the Supreme Court, and she hopes to be freed by April, in time to celebrate Easter with her family.


Until then, this steaming cell is her home office.


During the visit on Thursday, the senator, known for her sartorial taste and collection of colorful scarves, was trying to keep cool in a short-sleeved print blouse and black shorts.


She was in a combative mood. The day before, on a trip to Thailand, Mr. Duterte had publicly insulted her, saying she had a “thick face” and that she was the “queen Satan is waiting for in hell.”


As she sat at her desk, a small fan whirring in the background, sweat formed on her brow.


“Unsatisfied with the fact that he was already able to imprison me,” she wrote with a blue felt-tip across her Senate stationery, “he continues to destroy me before various audiences like a market fishwife and leaves no dignity whatsoever to the office he holds. I pity the president for believing in his own lies.”


It was a brief moment of righteous indignation punctuating a long, mostly solitary day.


“My life has become routine,” she said. “I have breakfast, then I read the papers, take a bath and then go to work on documents delivered by my staff here.”


She has her own toilet and running water. On a small table are wilting roses and other flowers. Recent visitors brought rare orchids in an attempt to liven the place up.


The prison has closed-circuit cameras in every corner except in her cell. The guards, she said, have been strict but “very professional and courteous.”


Her two adult sons, Vincent and Israel — who has autism — and two grandchildren try to visit her every week. But it has been hard, especially for Vincent, who is a law student, she said without elaborating.


Every week, her favorite among her 13 pet dogs is also brought in for a visit, a concession granted by her jailers.


“These visits lift my spirits, because as you can see, I am isolated,” she said.


She is also afraid.


She noted that a mayor whom Mr. Duterte had publicly accused of drug trafficking later died in jail, gunned down by police officers who raided his cell and claimed he had put up a violent fight.


“That can happen to me as well,” she said. “In the realm of possibilities, that can happen.”


She denounced as “fake news” reports that she tried to commit suicide after she was arrested, saying those reports were fabricated to lay the groundwork for a cover-up should she be killed in prison. She was not sick or depressed, she said.


“If I die inside Duterte’s prisons, it is not because I committed suicide,” she said then, “but it is because the president has finally ordered me killed. In the unfortunate event that I die in prison, you all know who my murderer is.”


To be safe in prison, she has food brought in by her staff from the outside.


“I cannot show myself to be afraid,” she said. “I don’t want to give them the satisfaction of seeing me defeated. But if you ask me if I feel safe, I can never feel safe.”


What is keeping her alive, she says, may be her stature and the international attention her case has drawn. The European Union and Human Rights Watch have both called for her release.


“But if the world is no longer watching, I believe the worst thing can happen to me,” she said. “I’ll be dead. I can never feel safe with a president like that.”


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nKKRGO
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL
6 Years After Ouster, Mubarak Is Freed in Muted Egypt


By DECLAN WALSH
Former President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt was returned on March 2 to Maadi Military Hospital in southern Cairo after a court hearing. He was freed from the hospital detention on Friday. Mohamed Hossam/European Pressphoto Agency
CAIRO — Six years after roaring crowds ousted him at the peak of the Arab Spring, former President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt was freed early Friday from the Cairo hospital where he had been detained, capping a long and largely fruitless effort to hold him accountable for human rights abuses and endemic corruption during his three decades of rule.


Mr. Mubarak, 88, was taken under armed escort from the Maadi Military Hospital in southern Cairo, where he had been living under guard in a room with a view of the Nile, to his mansion in the upmarket suburb of Heliopolis.


“He went home at 8:30 this morning,” his longtime lawyer, Farid el-Deeb, who has stewarded Mr. Mubarak through a tangled cluster of prosecutions since 2011, said by telephone. Mr. Mubarak celebrated his release by having breakfast with his wife, Suzanne, and sons, Alaa and Gamal.


The release begins a third act for Mr. Mubarak, a once unassailable Arab ruler and American ally who came to power in 1981 after the assassination of President Anwar Sadat during a military parade. Thirty years later, Mr. Mubarak’s own rule ended abruptly as multitudes thronged Tahrir Square for 18 days in the heady, hopeful early months of the Arab Spring.


At the time, Mr. Mubarak’s fall seemed to signal a sea change across the Arab world, shattering the established political order and suggesting that even its most powerful leaders were no longer immune from prosecution.


Hosni Mubarak, right, was the Egyptian vice president when he rode in a parade with President Anwar Sadat. Mr. Mubarak became president in 1981, after Mr. Sadat was assassinated. Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
His release on Friday crowned the crushing of those hopes for change, and the enduring disappointment of the Egyptians who had risked their lives to topple him — even if many now say the challenge is far bigger than a single man.


“At this point, I really don’t care,” said Ahmed Harara, an activist who lost his sight when he was shot by the police, first in the right eye and then in the left, during demonstrations in Cairo in 2011. “I realized years ago that this is not just about Mubarak and his regime, it’s an entire system that has now resurrected itself.” Mr. Mubarak’s release nonetheless was a politically delicate moment for the current president and former top general, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, who was taking a calculated risk that it would not incite a backlash.


In a telling reflection of government concern, Mr. Mubarak was released under conditions of secrecy on the quietest day of the week in Egypt. The state media said little about it.


Even the loyalists who frequently cheered Mr. Mubarak from the hospital gates through the years were not told beforehand of his pending release, although they were no less jubilant afterward.


“The lion is back in his den!” said Rehab Abdel Halim, a paratrooper who befriended Mr. Mubarak after he gave her a service award in 2009. “We feel so vindicated. Now nobody can call him ruthless or corrupt any more. If he had done something wrong, the courts would not have cleared him.”


When it was announced in February 2011 that President Mubarak would step down, Egyptians celebrated in Tahrir Square in Cairo. Moises Saman for The New York Times
Many other Egyptians, though, kept silent as they absorbed the news that Mr. Mubarak, a strongman once seen as the root of their woes, was once again free.


Weary, apathetic or fearful of openly speaking their minds, Egyptians have grown shy of confronting power. Although Mr. Mubarak faced a wide range of charges, he was ultimately convicted on a single relatively minor corruption charge. Few expected that his release — an unthinkable prospect just a few years ago — would result in any significant protests.


After becoming the first Arab leader to face trial in a regular court in his own country, Mr. Mubarak was initially imprisoned at the notorious Tora complex, then held at the Maadi Military Hospital. Some of the criminal counts against him carried the death penalty.


He was accused of having conspired with the police to kill 239 protesters in Tahrir Square; of having siphoned tens of millions of dollars from state coffers; and of having cut off the country’s internet access during the 2011 uprising, among other crimes. But what astonished Egyptians most was the sight of a man many had long feared, scowling in a courtroom cage.


Despite the prosecution, Mr. Mubarak remained defiant, insisting that he, not the Egyptian people, had been wronged. His sons joined him in the dock, accused of having embezzled millions of dollars and having overseen a vast system of cronyism and graft.


But by then, it was becoming clear to many Egyptians that while Mr. Mubarak had gone, the system he controlled — with the military, security agencies and courts in the background — remained firmly in place and would not cede power easily to restless young protesters.


The first democratic election, in 2012, brought to power a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood, Mohamed Morsi. But he lasted only a year, making a series of political blunders that cost him the support of the military, crucial parts of the security apparatus and millions of Egyptians, who gathered in the streets in June 2013 to call for his removal.


The military obliged on July 3 and installed General Sisi, its top commander, who cleared Brotherhood protesters from central Cairo with a massacre of at least 800 people by the security forces in August 2013. It signaled that no further uprisings would be tolerated, and Mr. Mubarak’s interminable trials seemed to reflect that change.


For his court appearances, Mr. Mubarak was flown by helicopter from the Maadi hospital, often wearing sunglasses as he was carried off the aircraft on a stretcher. Public anger toward him faded to weariness as Egyptians turned to more pressing matters: Mr. Sisi’s harsh crackdown on his opponents, the emerging war against Islamic State militants in the Sinai Peninsula and a growing economic crisis.


After a 2012 conviction for the deaths of protesters, Mr. Mubarak was sentenced to life in prison. But an appeals court overturned that verdict and ordered a retrial, and he was exonerated. He also skirted several corruption accusations.


As the political will to pursue Mr. Mubarak dissipated, his supporters re-emerged in public, cheering him from the hospital gates on his birthdays and blowing kisses during courtroom hearings. Rowdy public protests against Mr. Mubarak fizzled under anti-protest laws introduced by Mr. Sisi.


But one charge stuck: that Mr. Mubarak and his sons had embezzled millions of dollars in state money to refurbish the family’s main Cairo residence and other homes and offices.


In May 2015, a court sentenced Mr. Mubarak and his sons to three years in prison each and ordered them to pay $20 million in restitution and fines. But they were allowed to count time served.


The fines were small compared with the $433 million in Swiss bank accounts, several belonging to Mr. Mubarak and his family, that have been frozen by the Swiss authorities on suspicion of criminal activity. After years of faltering investigations, none of that money has been returned to Egypt.


Mr. Mubarak’s legal woes are not entirely over. On Thursday, a Cairo court created the basis for prosecutors to reopen a corruption investigation into gifts that Mr. Mubarak received from a state-owned newspaper while in power. But the inquiry will not require his continued detention.


Mr. Deeb, the lawyer, has said that his client intends to spend the coming months at his mansion in Cairo. He will join his wife, who in 2015 said the family had been vindicated. Some supporters have suggested that the couple will move to his villa at the Red Sea resort of Sharm el Sheikh.


Mr. Mubarak will enjoy the privileges of a retired head of state, including a security detail, although he is barred from leaving the country under the terms of a long-running graft investigation.


For Mr. Sisi, an increasingly stern autocrat who has miscalculated before, Mr. Mubarak’s new lease on life could still pose a delicate balancing act. Last year, for example, he set off unexpected street protests when Egypt transferred sovereignty of two small Red Sea islands to Saudi Arabia.


In speeches, Mr. Sisi pays lip service to the 2011 uprising. But in practice, he has crushed dissent, imprisoned tens of thousands of opponents and sought to consolidate his grip in Parliament, business and the security services — including many Mubarak-era officials and supporters. He has also allowed Mr. Mubarak’s closest allies, many fabulously wealthy through nepotism and corruption, to return to civilian life.


The release of Mr. Mubarak, the last person of his government still in detention, ends that process. But even Mr. Mubarak’s fiercest opponents say Mr. Sisi is unlikely to face major problems this time.


“Everything is upside down,” said Montasser al-Zayat, an Islamist lawyer who was imprisoned four times under Mr. Mubarak, and whose clients include the supreme leader of the Muslim Brotherhood, Mohamed Badie. “The road to democracy is blocked. Egyptians do not feel safe expressing themselves. They cannot come into the streets without risking death or imprisonment.”


So, he said, “it has become acceptable to let Mubarak out.”


Follow Declan Walsh on Twitter @declanwalsh.


Nour Youssef contributed reporting.


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mXODIn
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL
Father Tries to Clear Name of Germanwings Co-Pilot


By MELISSA EDDY
Günter Lubitz at a news conference on Friday, the second anniversary of the crash of Germanwings Flight 9525. Mr. Lubitz challenged investigators’ conclusion that his son Andreas had deliberately crashed the plane. Markus Schreiber/Associated Press
BERLIN — While families and friends gathered in Germany and southern France to mourn the victims of the crash of Germanwings Flight 9525, Günter Lubitz broke his silence on Friday to challenge the authorities’ conclusion that his son Andreas deliberately crashed the plane into the face of a mountain two years ago.


Mr. Lubitz sat stiffly in his dark suit, flanked by two lawyers, and faced journalists’ questions about why he had chosen this, of all days, to try to cast doubt on the execution and findings of the investigation into the crash, in which his son and 149 others died.


His decision to use the second anniversary of the crash to defend his son outraged many. But Mr. Lubitz, 63, insisted that he would have been subjected to criticism on any day for his decision to question whether experts and the authorities had leapt too quickly to the conclusion that his son deliberately caused the crash because he was mentally ill.


“We did not choose this day to hurt the other families,” Mr. Lubitz said, reading deliberately from a prepared statement. “We chose this day because it promised the greatest attention.”


Investigators in France and Germany found that the younger Mr. Lubitz, the co-pilot of the plane, was alone in the cockpit at the time of the crash. They determined that he “intentionally modified the autopilot settings” to cause the plane to swiftly descend and refused to allow the pilot back into the cockpit. They also found he had been taking antidepressant medication the day of the crash and “was experiencing mental disorder with psychotic symptoms.”


A student in front of a memorial with the names of victims of the Germanwings crash during a commemoration at the Joseph-König secondary school in Haltern am See, Germany, on Friday. Ina Fassbender/DPA, via Associated Press
But Mr. Lubitz repeatedly insisted that his son had fully recovered from the bout of depression he experienced six years before the crash and that he had “found his way back to his original energy and joy of life.” Although Mr. Lubitz was unable to provide proof to support his claims, he insisted that his son’s visits to several doctors, including a psychiatrist, in 2014 and late 2015 were linked only to problems with his eyesight.


“Our son was not suffering from depression at the time of the crash,” Mr. Lubitz said repeatedly during a news conference in a Berlin hotel, which went on for more than two hours.


Mr. Lubitz explained that while other families were able to grieve the loss of their sons, daughters, spouses or friends, his family’s grief was different.


“We have to live with the fact that we not only lost our son and brother but that already two days after the crash he was labeled by French prosecutors as the only one responsible,” he said. “We must live with the fact that he was, and still is, portrayed in the media as a depressive mass murderer.”


That a father would seek to exonerate his son “is human and understandable,” said Christian Kumpa, a prosecutor in Düsseldorf who led a German investigation into the crash that determined it was caused solely by the co-pilot. He and his office stood by their report, he said.


“There are no indications for a cause of the crash that are not attributable to deliberate, presumably suicidal behavior,” Mr. Kumpa said.


Tim van Beveren, a journalist and pilot who appeared with Mr. Lubitz at the Friday news conference, said that both French and German prosecutors were biased against the younger Mr. Lubitz at the outset of their investigations.


Mr. van Beveren questioned whether investigators had sufficiently taken into account the winds at the time of the crash and whether the keypad to open the cockpit door had malfunctioned. He offered no new theory or evidence for investigators to pursue.


Yves Deshayes, of the French pilots’ union SNPL, spoke to France Bleu Azur radio and defended investigators’ findings. “Based on what I saw in the Bureau of Investigations and Analyses report, there were no elements that would allow for calling into question the scenario put forward,” Mr. Deshayes said. “Of course, if new elements are discovered, we look at them.”


Ulrich Wessel, the principal of a school in Haltern am See, Germany, that lost two teachers and 16 students in the crash, called Mr. Lubitz’s decision to hold the news conference on the anniversary a “provocation” and an “insult to the parents.”


Josef Cercek, whose daughter Sonja was one of the teachers killed, chose to mark the day by assembling his long, wooden Alpine horn on the platform that overlooks the jagged mountains where the crash occurred. “There,” he said, “I will play ‘Amazing Grace’ for her and for all the victims.”


Follow Melissa Eddy on Twitter @meddynyt.


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mZSipf
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL
An Odd Stunt at Auschwitz Is Investigated


By RICK LYMAN and JOANNA BERENDT
The gate of the Auschwitz memorial. A group of young people staged a bizarre stunt at the site on Friday. Daniel Rodrigues for The New York Times
WARSAW — Nearly a dozen people in their 20s gathered beside the entrance to the Auschwitz memorial on Friday afternoon, slaughtered a sheep, stripped naked and chained themselves together. A fireworks device was set off in the nearby parking lot.


At one point, the young people draped a banner reading “Love” over the entrance gate to the former Nazi concentration camp with its infamous scrollwork bearing the three German words “Arbeit Macht Frei,” or “Work Makes You Free.”


On Friday evening, the authorities were still trying to figure out who the people are and what they thought they were doing.


One local media report said the people had filmed themselves with a drone. Other reports said they were protesting the conflict in eastern Ukraine, though what their staged demonstration had to do with that was unexplained.


Officials at the Auschwitz-Birkenau Memorial and Museum — on the sites of the two camps where more than one million people died during World War II — said they had been caught off guard and had no idea what was intended.


One of the suspects detained by the police after the disturbance at the Auschwitz memorial in Oswiecim, Poland. Jacek Bednarczyk/European Pressphoto Agency
Malgorzata Jurecka, a spokeswoman for the district police office in Oswiecim (Auschwitz is the German spelling), said late Friday that 11 people were detained — six Poles, four Belarussians and one German. “At the moment, we are gathering and securing all the evidence connected with this case to determine the exact involvement of the individuals in this dramatic incident,” she said. “It was macabre.”


Museum officials take a dim view of groups using the site as a backdrop for political statements. “Using the symbol of Auschwitz for any kind of manifestations or happenings is outrageous and unacceptable,” the museum said in a statement. “It is disrespectful to the memory of all the victims.”


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nNWKvr
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL
Israel May Offer General Commitment to Slow Settlement Building


By MARK LANDLER
The Israeli settlement of Maale Adumim, in the occupied West Bank, last month. Ammar Awad/Reuters
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration’s negotiations with the Israeli government are expected to yield only a general commitment — and not a specific pledge — to slow the building of Jewish settlements in the West Bank, an administration official briefed on the talks said on Friday.


The White House believes it is unrealistic to expect Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to sign on to an agreement that sets numerical or geographic limitations on construction, said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal deliberations.


Instead, the official said, the United States would measure success by whether there was evidence that construction was slowing down — a trend that President Trump has said is important to create the conditions for a peace accord between the Israelis and Palestinians.


Such a vague agreement would be less than some hoped for, especially after Mr. Trump last month unexpectedly raised the rapid spread of settlements as a roadblock to a potential peace deal.


“I’d like to see you hold back on settlements for a little bit,” Mr. Trump told Mr. Netanyahu on Feb. 15, during the Israeli premier’s visit to the White House. “We’ll work something out.”


Mr. Netanyahu replied, “Let’s try it,” prompting Mr. Trump to joke, “Doesn’t sound too optimistic, but he’s a good negotiator.”


On Thursday, a delegation of senior aides to Mr. Netanyahu left Washington after four days of talks with a White House team that left the settlements issue unresolved. A White House statement said administration officials had reiterated Mr. Trump’s “concerns” about the impact of new settlements on the prospects for peace.


But the statement added that the “Israeli delegation made clear that Israel’s intent going forward is to adopt a policy regarding settlement activity that takes those concerns into consideration.”


Mr. Trump surprised virtually everybody when he raised Israeli settlements as an issue after taking office. Many in Israel expected that, given his unstinting support of Mr. Netanyahu during the campaign and his vow to move the American Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, he would give the Israelis carte blanche to expand settlement construction.


Instead, the administration put the embassy move on the back burner. And Mr. Trump told an Israeli newspaper, Israel Hayom, that he viewed settlements as unhelpful for a peace accord. “Every time you take land for settlements,” he said, “there is less land left.”


The last time Mr. Netanyahu tangled with a president over settlements, the dispute played out publicly: President Barack Obama’s secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, demanded that Israel cease all construction — “not some settlements, not outposts, not natural-growth exceptions.” This time, the two sides appear determined to work out an understanding privately, so as not to undermine the rapport the two leaders have established.


Extracting a deal from Mr. Netanyahu in current circumstances would be tricky. The Israeli leader is politically more vulnerable than he was eight years ago, when Mr. Obama demanded that he freeze all construction.


Right-wing members of his coalition are committed to the settler movement and Mr. Netanyahu, several experts said, cannot afford to look as if he is yielding too quickly to Mr. Trump’s pressure.


“He can’t square the circle,” said Martin S. Indyk, who served as special envoy for Israeli-Palestinian negotiations during the Obama administration. “He can’t agree to a freeze and keep his coalition.”


But Mr. Netanyahu, experts said, could also use his new rapport with Mr. Trump to his advantage. The standoff over settlements helped poison Mr. Netanyahu’s relationship with Mr. Obama, and the Israeli leader can argue that it must not be allowed to do the same with Mr. Trump.


“I don’t think you can come to a quick deal,” said Dennis B. Ross, who also advised Mr. Obama and several other presidents on the peace process. “It looks like there is a context being created for an agreement later on.”


Previous administrations have struggled in their attempts to negotiate deals on settlements. The Obama administration managed to get Mr. Netanyahu to agree to a 10-month moratorium on construction, which was meant to open a window for talks between Israel and the Palestinians. But the 2010 process went nowhere, in part because the Palestinians did not come to the table until the moratorium was close to expiring, and Mr. Netanyahu refused to extend it.


Mr. Trump has named a longtime lawyer from his real estate company, Jason D. Greenblatt, to lead the negotiations with Israel. Mr. Greenblatt reports to Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, who did not take part in this week’s negotiations. Mr. Greenblatt has tasked a National Security Council official from the Obama administration, Yael Lempert, to help in the talks, which has fanned criticism from the right wing in Israel.


“These guys are learning on the run,” said Daniel C. Kurtzer, a former American ambassador to Israel and Egypt. “They’re also understanding that you can get snookered here.”


Mr. Kurtzer, who was involved during the George W. Bush administration in trying to set specific limits to settlement construction, said the process was bewildering in its complexity. Defining settlement blocs, and defining permissible construction within them, is open to endless debate, he said.


Settlements have become increasingly contentious at the United Nations as well. It is arguably the most politically delicate issue for the new secretary general, António Guterres, as he seeks to create a working relationship with the Trump administration, which has accused the organization of a deep anti-Israel bias.


Anything that the administration considers hostile to Israel, Mr. Guterres knows, could be used to alienate both the White House and influential members of Congress who exert enormous influence over American financial support for the 193-member United Nations.


The Security Council voted in a Dec. 23 resolution to condemn the Israeli settlements as illegal and demand that Israel halt their construction, arguing they constituted a major obstacle to peace talks. Mr. Trump, president-elect at the time, expressed fury at the Obama administration for having abstained in that vote instead of blocking it with a veto.


At the Security Council on Friday, the secretary general’s special envoy for the Middle East, Nickolay Mladenov, said in his first report since the resolution was adopted that Israel not only had failed to comply with the demand on settlements, but had undertaken a big expansion, of more than 5,000 units. Mr. Mladenov called the expansion “deeply concerning” and said that the “territorial contiguity of a future Palestinian state” is threatened.


“Such actions are in breach of international law and they must stop,” Mr. Mladenov said. “Settlement expansion undermines the very essence of a two-state solution.”


Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.


Rick Gladstone contributed reporting from New York.


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nObtXf
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL
Indian State’s New Leaders Threaten a Lucrative Buffalo Meat Industry


By ELLEN BARRY and SUHASINI RAJ
Buffalo meat being processed in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh. Andrea Bruce for The New York Times
NARAHARA, India — In recent years, as demand for cheap protein raged in China and the Persian Gulf countries, India quietly became the world’s largest exporter of meat — chiefly flash-frozen water buffalo, which approached $5 billion in exports in 2015.


Slaughterhouses proliferated in the west of Uttar Pradesh, and the surrounding villages underwent an economic transformation. Children raised on plain roti began to eat lentils twice a day.


But that spurt of prosperity came under threat this week, when a new Hindu-right government in the state, led by the fiery cleric Yogi Adityanath, began shutting down parts of the Muslim-dominated buffalo meat industry. Hindu activists say the industry conceals the illegal slaughter of cows, which are sacred to Hindus.


Though Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s governing party has long balanced its commitment to export-driven development against its embrace of right-wing Hindu causes, it has rarely made such a stark choice between them. The state’s new leaders promise more meat factories will be shut in the coming days, and they say the blow to the economy is less important than the principle of protecting the cow.


“The government should do it on moral grounds,” said Karunesh Nandan Garg, 57, president of the Meerut division of the governing Bharatiya Janata Party. He cited the example of prostitution in Thailand, which is largely tolerated by the authorities and “a major revenue producer” there. “But is that right? Money isn’t everything.”


A buffalo at a cattle market in Mumbai. Buffalo meat has overtaken rice as India’s largest food export. Tom Jamieson for The New York Times
Uttar Pradesh is India’s largest meat-producing state, with 41 of the country’s 75 licensed slaughterhouses and meat processing plants, according to the Commerce Ministry. Scores more operate without licenses, and an exhaustive list of laws govern the slaughter, transport and sale of meat, so the government can easily find a pretext to shut even licensed businesses.


On Hapur Road, which is lined with slaughterhouses and meatpacking plants, economic activity had ground to a halt within days of Mr. Adityanath’s swearing-in.


District officials sealed seven factories in the area on Tuesday and Wednesday, citing irregularities in paperwork. The police were ordered to patrol the plants and search vehicles for cows, so frightening suppliers that they stopped delivering buffaloes. Workers, told to go home for the day, had instead gathered in tea stalls, nervously trading reports.


“We are waiting to see what the government decides,” said Muhammad Akhtar, a migrant from Bihar who has worked in the meat factories for 20 years, earning around 10,000 rupees, about $150, in a good month.


“Modi has said he wants economic development for everyone,” Mr. Akhtar said. “This job has allowed my children to eat and go to school. All we want is peace, to be allowed to work in peace.”


India has become the world’s largest exporter of meat — chiefly flash-frozen water buffalo. Andrea Bruce for The New York Times
Life in this strip of villages had changed drastically with the advent of the meat factories a decade ago, people here said. Mud huts, which routinely collapsed during the monsoon, had been replaced by solid brick buildings. Men working in the factories had begun to invest in motor scooters. Women had been pulled into the work force, abruptly doubling family incomes.


Mr. Akhtar said he could afford to remain in Uttar Pradesh for two weeks without pay, and then he would have no choice but to return to his native village, along with thousands of other migrant workers who gravitated here for jobs. Other men clustered around him — peddlers, truck dispatchers, factory supervisors, cleaners, butchers. Some of them warned that further pressure on the industry would lead to violence.


“Suppose that there are five people in a single family working here, and they are all jobless,” said Muhammad Majid, 21, who has been working at a slaughterhouse since he was 15. “If there are riots, they will be difficult to contain.”


Most Indians were not aware that buffalo meat overtook rice as the country’s largest food export in 2015.


The industry’s growth has gone unnoticed mainly because of religious sensitivities: Meatpacking, like leather, is a sector dominated by Muslims, who make up around 19 percent of this state’s population. Though it is legal to slaughter buffalo when they are old and can no longer give milk, right-wing Hindu groups have long suggested that cows were being spirited into the facilities, and they have routinely intercepted supply vehicles for aggressive searches.


In January, in its manifesto ahead of Uttar Pradesh’s state elections, the B.J.P. promised to take a step further: to shut down “all illegal slaughterhouses” and restrict mechanized ones. It was not clear this week whether that campaign would extend to the largest meatpacking businesses, which are licensed by the government and bring in vast amounts of revenue. Some people in the Muslim neighborhoods dependent on meat processing said they doubted that it would.


“Look at the numbers,” said Nadeem Chauhan, a politician with the out-of-power Bahujan Samaj Party. “Why do you think the central government and the prime minister have not already shut down this business? It’s the biggest cash generator for the government. It brings in foreign currency.”


That optimism was not apparent on Hapur Road, where the face of the anti-slaughterhouse campaign was Sanjay Chaturvedi, a district veterinary officer.


Mr. Chaturvedi was making rounds of the area’s factories wearing a red tilak, the smudge of vermilion applied after Hindu prayers, and a Los Angeles Lakers cap. He said he had often tried to take action against slaughterhouses on environmental grounds but had never been free to do so because they had protectors in the previous, Muslim-friendly government.


“As soon as I would approach a factory, I would get a call from some politician,” he said. “People in government had their hands in the business.”


That had changed almost as soon as the new chief minister was sworn in. His new orders were to be on “high alert,” and Mr. Chaturvedi happily complied, cruising around surrounding factories with his new police escort.


At midday, Mr. Chaturvedi passed a chicken feed factory called Universal India and caught a whiff from its tallow-rendering vats that he described as “very, very foul.”


“The smell seemed to indicate that there were cow parts there, inside the factory,” he said. “You know it from the smell.”


He proceeded to the gate and informed the factory’s owner, Aas Muhammad, that his vehicles would be searched for illicit cow parts. Mr. Muhammad protested that his plant, which employs 150 people, does not slaughter animals at all, but instead uses byproducts discarded by government-approved slaughterhouses.


When that proved unpersuasive, he charged out onto the roadway after Mr. Chaturvedi, his hands shaking with rage and anxiety. He shouted to a waiting camera crew that the inspector had for years solicited bribes, most recently of 200,000 rupees. Mr. Chaturvedi brushed the accusation aside, saying, “Oh, that is nothing, that is nothing.”


“You go and prove that this smell is coming from our factory,” said the owner’s brother, Wasim Qureshi.


“You will see, you will see!” Mr. Chaturvedi shouted as he drove away. His day was close to its end, and he was in a good mood. Of the 10 working meat factories on this road, he said, four would be shuttered by the summer. A detachment of police officers and state officials pulled up to Universal India on Wednesday morning and sealed the premises, by orders of the state government.


Mr. Muhammad sent his workers home, asking them to be patient before seeking other jobs.


“They will wait for the next week, maybe 10 days,” he said. “Then, some of them will end up pulling rickshaws.”


Follow Ellen Barry @EllenBarryNYT and Suhasini Raj @suhasiniraj on Twitter.


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nKaXtq
EmailFacebook
 
INTERNATIONAL
Climate Change Worsens China Smog, Studies Say


By JAVIER C. HERNÁNDEZ
An extremely polluted December day in Shengfang, in the northern Chinese province of Hebei. New research suggests climate change may be hindering China’s efforts to solve its devastating smog crisis. Damir Sagolj/Reuters
BEIJING — Chinese leaders, grappling with some of the world’s worst air pollution, have long assumed the answer to their woes was gradually reducing the level of smog-forming chemicals emitted from power plants, steel factories and cars.


But new research suggests another factor may be hindering China’s efforts to take control of its devastating smog crisis: climate change.


Changing weather patterns linked to rising global temperatures have resulted in a dearth of wind across northern China, according to several recent studies, exacerbating a wave of severe pollution that has been blamed for millions of premature deaths. Wind usually helps blow away smog, but changes in weather patterns in recent decades have left many of China’s most populous cities poorly ventilated, scientists say.


The findings, some of the first to link climate change to smog, may escalate pressure on Chinese leaders to move more swiftly to shutter steel factories and coal-fired power plants amid rising public anger over smog caused by soot and gases like sulfur dioxide. The research could also push China to assume an even more forceful role in international efforts to curb climate change by reducing carbon emissions, at a time when the United States, under President Trump, appears to be backing away from the issue.


“Everyone used to think that controlling smog hinged on reducing regional pollution,” said Liao Hong, a professor at Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology and the co-author of a climate change study published this week. “Now it’s clear that it will require a global effort.”


Beijing in January. Wind usually helps blow away smog, but changes in weather patterns in recent decades have left many of China’s most populous cities poorly ventilated, scientists say. China Stringer Network, via Reuters
As public outrage has grown in China over dirty skies and a rash of respiratory illnesses linked to smog, Chinese officials have redoubled efforts in recent years to fight air pollution. They have sent teams of police officers to inspect factories, closed hundreds of coal-fired power plants and imposed limits on driving and activities like outdoor barbecuing.


Premier Li Keqiang, speaking at the annual session of China’s legislature this month, vowed to “make our skies blue again” and promised to take further steps to reduce the use of coal.


But even if Chinese officials push forward with ambitious plans to cut emissions, they may struggle to offset the effects of climate change, the findings suggest.


Ms. Liao’s study, which examined data on pollution in Beijing from 2009 to 2016, predicted that weather conditions associated with severe smog would become increasingly common in coming decades. The study did not account for possible reductions in carbon emissions under the 2015 Paris Agreement on climate change.


Scientists point to the so-called airpocalypse that fell on Beijing in January 2013 as an example of the effects of climate change on smog.


Walking through smog in Zhengzhou, in the central province of Henan, in January. Research linking climate change to smog may escalate pressure on China to shutter steel factories and coal-fired power plants. China Stringer Network, via Reuters
During that episode, Beijing and dozens of other cities in northern China were shrouded in toxic haze for days. Despite emergency measures to cut emissions, the concentration of PM2.5, particles of a size that can penetrate the bloodstream, remained dangerously high.


Researchers now attribute the resilience of smog during that period to unusually stagnant air conditions brought on by climate change. The air was the stillest in three decades during the heavy particulate pollution in 2013, according to a study published this month in the journal Science Advances.


The study found that the melting of ice in the Arctic, combined with increased snowfall in Siberia, contributed to changes in wind patterns across Asia that winter that failed to clear the air over northern China.


Yuhang Wang, an atmospheric scientist at Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta who was a co-author of the study, said the results suggested that Chinese officials would have an especially difficult time curbing air pollution in the winter, when weather conditions are most conducive to smog and more coal is burned for heating. The Ministry of Environmental Protection pledged this month to put in place stricter policies to curb winter air pollution. Beijing is set to host the Winter Olympics in 2022.


“In the long run, emission reductions of both pollutants and greenhouse gases are needed to mitigate the winter haze problem,” Mr. Wang said.


The effect of climate change on air pollution might extend beyond China. In a study last year, for example, Mr. Wang found that warmer and drier conditions might lead to longer stretches of ozone pollution in parts of the southeastern United States. (Previous studies have also shown a link between climate change and ozone pollution.)


The Chinese government has emerged as one of the leading voices on fighting climate change. As the Trump administration hints that it might move away from international efforts to cut emissions, environmentalists are looking to China, the world’s largest emitter of greenhouse gases, to play a leading role in curbing the use of fossil fuels.


The government has pledged to go more aggressively after polluters and to cut excess production in heavy industry. Already, some progress has been made, with particulate pollution falling nearly 10 percent in the Beijing area over the past three winters, according to government statistics.


But many cities, especially in the north, continue to experience severe bouts of smog, resulting in school closures, traffic accidents and increases in hospital visits. Enforcement of environmental laws remains lax, and steel capacity actually rose last year, contributing to a surge in air pollution, a Greenpeace report found.


The growing body of research on the links between climate change and air pollution might serve as a rallying cry for China to take a more aggressive role in cutting greenhouse gas emissions. But it could also give the government another excuse for the country’s pollution problems, analysts said.


“In light of growing local protests against poor air quality, linking this issue with climate conditions outside of China underscores the fact that the pollution problem has international sources in addition to local,” said Marc Lanteigne, a senior lecturer on Chinese defense and security issues at Massey University in New Zealand.


Environmentalists said the role of climate change in exacerbating smog was an important finding. But they underlined the need for local governments to do more to reduce emissions.


“It won’t change the overall conclusion that air pollutant emission is the direct and interior cause for this air pollution problem,” Dong Liansai, a climate and energy advocate at Greenpeace in Beijing, wrote in an email. “Much more action is required.”


Follow Javier C. Hernández on Twitter @HernandezJavier.


Owen Guo contributed research.


SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nKoVM2
EmailFacebook
 
NEXT SECTION: NATIONAL


PREVIOUS SECTION: OBITUARIES
Editorials, Op-Ed and Letters | EDITORIALS
The TrumpRyanCare Debacle

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD

President Trump spoke about the failure of the Republican health bill on Friday at the White House. Al Drago/The New York Times
Repealing the Affordable Care Act was meant to be the first demonstration of the power and effectiveness of a unified Republican government. It has turned out to be a display of incompetence and cruelty.

Republican leaders withdrew the American Health Care Act before a vote scheduled for Friday afternoon after it became clear that they did not have the votes to pass it. Many far-right conservatives opposed the bill because it would not have completely repealed the A.C.A., or Obamacare. And some more moderate Republicans said they would vote no because the bill would cause immense damage — 24 million people would lose health insurance over 10 years and millions of others would be hit with higher premiums and higher out-of-pocket costs. Surely, many of them were also thinking about a recent Quinnipiac University poll showing that 56 percent of American voters opposed the legislation and just 17 percent supported it.

When Barack Obama was president, Republicans in the House voted dozens of times to repeal the health care law in a symbolic exercise meant to appeal to their base. But never did they present a plan that could improve on the law for their constituents. Still, G.O.P. leaders imagined that with the House, Senate and White House in their hands, what had once been a hollow threat could become actual policy. That they failed in this legislative effort could well affect the rest of their agenda — tax cuts for the rich, changing the corporate tax structure and new infrastructure spending. The debacle shows President Trump and Paul Ryan, the speaker of the House, that they can’t count on automatic Republican majorities, especially when they’re offering a destructive, incoherent measure.

Which is pretty much what happened here. Despite their ceaseless attacks on the health care act since Mr. Obama signed it into law in March 2010, Mr. Trump, Mr. Ryan and their colleagues have never had a workable plan that could gain the support of a congressional majority. That is why they rushed their turkey of a bill to the floor without going through the laborious process of holding hearings and building coalitions. The last-minute wheeling and dealing did nothing to disguise the bill’s underlying and increasingly obvious purpose, which was to reduce taxes for the wealthy by cutting benefits for the needy.

Meanwhile, the great dealmaker at the White House was completely ineffectual. Mr. Trump spent a few days cajoling and threatening lawmakers, then threw up his hands and said he had done all he could and was now moving on to other matters. Groups representing doctors and hospitals, as well as public interest groups like AARP and the American Civil Liberties Union, fought hard, and even Republican governors like John Kasich of Ohio and Brian Sandoval of Nevada opposed the bill.

In fact, as Republicans moved closer to a vote, public support for Obamacare went up — 49 percent of those polled this month by the Kaiser Family Foundation had a favorable view of the law, up from 43 percent in December. Obamacare, though not without flaws, has done a world of good. The percentage of Americans who do not have health insurance has fallen to 9.1 percent, from 16.3 percent in 2010. A 2016 Kaiser study of people who gained insurance in California found that 77 percent of them said their health needs were being met very well or somewhat well. By comparison, only 49 percent of those people said their needs were being met three years earlier.

There is no doubt that improvements are needed. Deductibles and premiums are too high for many people, and too many young people are forgoing insurance altogether. More generous subsidies for people with modest incomes could bring the cost of health care down at a relatively small expense to the government.

The worry now among advocates for lower-income Americans and the sick is that the Trump administration might seek to undermine the health care law through administrative steps. For example, officials could seek to reduce subsidies that help people earning just above the federal poverty line pay for out-of-pocket costs. Republicans in the House sued the Obama administration in 2014 to block those subsidies. That case is still pending, and the Trump administration could decide to stop defending the subsidies. Such a move would only compound the mistakes it made by trying to rush a half-baked bill through the House.

Friday’s outcome is good for the country, but humiliating for the Republican leadership. For Mr. Trump, it is a rather brutal reminder that campaigning is the easy part.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nOgeQL
EmailFacebook

Editorials, Op-Ed and Letters | EDITORIAL
Trump Administration Clears Trump Hotel

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Dandy/John J. Custer
Since the election, it has been clear that Donald Trump cannot both be president and maintain a lease on the government-owned Old Post Office building in Washington, where he opened an opulent hotel last year. Now, a federal official who works for the agency that negotiated the lease (and that, conveniently, reports to the president) has come up with a bizarre, tortured and ultimately dishonest rationale for why Mr. Trump can keep it.

Mr. Trump’s 2013 lease with the General Services Administration stipulates that no elected official “shall be admitted to any share or part of this Lease, or to any benefit that may arise therefrom.” Legal experts say the president is clearly in violation of that clause and the government should either terminate the lease or force Mr. Trump to transfer it to somebody else. On Thursday, however, an agency contracting official, Kevin Terry, declared that the president was not in violation because he had agreed not to receive any profits from the hotel until after he leaves office.

Mr. Terry engages in legal gymnastics that no lawyer could credibly defend. It should not matter when Mr. Trump accepts the profits from the hotel; he benefits even if he waits until after he leaves the White House to pocket them. Mr. Terry argues that as long as Mr. Trump’s profits are reinvested in the hotel, rather than deposited in his bank account, there is no violation. But by reinvesting the profits, Mr. Trump is increasing the value of the hotel and its ability to earn more money in the future. He has a 60-year lease on the building, and not pocketing profits for a few years is hardly a sacrifice.

Then there’s the not-so-little matter of the Constitution, which Mr. Trump is violating by owning the hotel. Article I of the Constitution prohibits all federal government officials from accepting gifts, profits and other payments from foreign governments without the approval of Congress. As it happens, foreign governments have been booking rooms and hosting events at the Trump hotel. In addition, Article II of the Constitution specifically bars the president from earning any emoluments, or profits, from the federal government or state governments in addition to his salary. Experts say that clause prohibits Mr. Trump’s Washington hotel and his other businesses from earning money or receiving other benefits from federal or state agencies — including Mr. Terry’s decision to let Mr. Trump keep the lease.

As we have argued before, Mr. Trump can resolve these problems by divesting all of his businesses and putting the proceeds into a blind trust. But he refuses to do that, and indeed appears to be retreating from an earlier promise that he would have nothing to do with his business while in office. The president’s son Eric recently told Forbes that he would be giving Mr. Trump regular updates.

Meanwhile, the Republican-controlled Congress is unwilling to force the president to divest or even to investigate his businesses and finances. A recently filed lawsuit, invoking the Constitution, asks a federal court to bar him from accepting profits from foreign governments. In addition, the Cork Wine Bar in Washington had sued Mr. Trump. The bar’s owners argue that they have lost business because Mr. Trump’s hotel possesses a fundamentally illegal advantage.

Until Congress does its job, such lawsuits may be the only avenue of protest.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nO6Zjx
EmailFacebook

Editorials, Op-Ed and Letters | EDITORIAL
Echoes of Gunfire Hurt Tender N.R.A. Ears

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD
A customer trying out a Remington 1911 equipped with a silencer at a gun store in Chantilly, Va. Samuel Corum/Anadolu Agency, via Getty Images
It is a chilling commentary on the nature of gun mayhem in this country that dozens of cities and towns are resorting to new listening technology so the police can track the location of gunfire in a matter of seconds.

The annual tally of 30,000-plus gun deaths accounts for just a tiny fraction of the total shots fired, most of which miss their targets but terrorize neighborhoods. Amid the lethal cacophony, the police in more than 90 cities here and abroad seek to reach the scene of the latest gun troubles more quickly by using an audio detection system called ShotSpotter, which triangulates the sound of gunfire onto computer maps. Police officers in major cities hail these precise early alarms of where the latest shooting is.

Yet despite these advances, the National Rifle Association argues, self-servingly, that noisy guns are a public health hazard. With the help of supporters like President Trump’s son Donald Jr., a gun hobbyist, it wants to roll back an 80-year-old federal law that tightly controls the sale of firearm silencers. Immune to irony, the N.R.A.’s congressional friends have introduced a measure called the Hearing Protection Act, which contends that the sound of gunfire is hard on the ears of gun owners.

“What about the rest of us?” the nation’s unarmed majority might well ask. When it comes to public health, the noisier a gun is, the better the chances for innocent bystanders to hit the ground and for police officers to apprehend the shooter.

At present, silencers, also known as suppressors, are available only to gun owners who pay a $200 tax and undergo a rigorous nine-month vetting process. Like machine guns and hand grenades, silencers were considered a special menace by Congress back in the mob warfare days of the 1930s when tight controls were enacted.

Firearms sellers, eager to cash in on what has become a vanity item, argue that silencers should be regulated no more tightly than gun purchases. The latter, of course, undergo a shoddy process with dangerous loopholes that Congress has declined to close.

If the bill succeeds, ending the $200 tax and the vetting period, silencers will be much more available to the public. Inevitably, they will show up in the hands of the mass shooters who indulge macho fantasies in brandishing the adapted military assault weapons and large ammunition clips available in the civilian market. Before congressional lawmakers give in to the gun lobby’s latest twisted demand, they had better ask themselves why they would want to help muffle a shooter’s deadly deeds.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nObfPT
EmailFacebook

Editorials, Op-Ed and Letters | CONTRIBUTING OP-ED WRITER
The Elephant Hunter of Trump Tower

By TIMOTHY EGAN
President Theodore Roosevelt with a slain elephant in Kenya in 1909. Bettmann, via Getty Images
Donald Trump Jr. came in for some merciless mocking when he posed in this newspaper in a grunge-era flannel shirt, sitting awkwardly atop a tree stump at the family estate, looking glum and lonely. A rejected Cialis ad was one of the kinder suggestions.

But look deeper. Buried in that profile was something — a saffron-thin thread of hope — that could keep his father from hastening the early death of the planet. The elder Trump has repeatedly indicated his intent to withdraw American cooperation from the global agreement to negate climate change, yet another middle finger from this president to the rest of the world, and to his grandchildren. His budget would let poisons flow through American rivers and be belched into the sky overhead.

The other Donald Trump, the kid with the burden of going through life with that name, may be the only person who can stop him. In the profile, junior comes across as a little boy lost, emotionally abandoned after the divorce of parents whose every hour is spent in bold face. Sent away to boarding school. Finding some solace hunting and fishing with a grandfather in Czechoslovakia. As he tries to navigate around the toxic swagger of the old man, he relishes his time in nature. It’s not, mind you, listening to yellow-rump warblers on spring days. It’s killing things. Pheasant and deer. And bigger things, elephants and leopards, creatures so magnificent that most people cringe at the thought of ending their lives in a sporting pursuit.

But there was another famous New Yorker who did much the same thing after going through a long stretch of emotional trauma — Teddy Roosevelt. And there you find the saffron-thin thread of hope. For on the desk of Donald Trump Jr. is a bronze statue of T.R. — the most muscular defender of creation in this nation’s history.

Step one is for Trump Jr. to read up on the bronze. If he hasn’t already, he should try Edmund Morris’s “The Rise of Theodore Roosevelt” and David McCullough’s “Mornings on Horseback” for starters.

His was a manic presidency, the positive antipode to Trump’s reign of regression. He created the National Wildlife Refuge system, the first one being a haven for pelicans in Florida. He tripled the holdings of national forests and established five national parks. In all, he set aside about 230 million acres of public land for future generations — an endowment 50 percent larger than Texas.

And yes, he hunted, pretty much anything. For Roosevelt, one reason to preserve all those living things was to have an opportunity to kill them later. But his love of nature was deep and consistent. “When I hear of the destruction of a species,” he wrote a friend, “I feel as if all the works of some great writer had perished.”

No doubt, Roosevelt would have detested Trump. “It tires me to talk to rich men,” he once said. “You expect a man of millions to be worth hearing, but as a rule, they don’t know anything outside their own business.”

But Trump Jr. certainly likes Roosevelt. If he takes away just one thing from the president who launched a century of progress, it should be his thunderous pitch for posterity in his New Nationalism speech of 1910. He said, “Of all the questions which can come before this nation there isn’t one which compares in importance with the central task of leaving this land even a better land for our descendants than it is for us.”

That seems rather obvious — everywhere but inside the Trump White House. The president’s budget blueprint would gut the core mission of the agency charged with ensuring clear air and water. It would cripple the departments that oversee parks and national forests. And, in another stab at his base, he would make it much more difficult to get in and out of the open spaces of America, eliminating the federal assistance that keeps many rural airports from closing.

Of course, at a time when Trump’s other proposals would literally mean death to poor people newly deprived of health care and would stop vital cancer research that could save millions of lives, the concerns of the natural world can seem secondary.

Still, that’s the only area where Trump Jr. could match his passions with a policy block. His tweets, including the recent hit-and-miss attack on the mayor of London, show him to be an otherwise meanspirited, incurious and accuracy-challenged chip off the old block.

Sickly as a child, heartbroken as a young man over the loss of his wife and mother on the same day, Teddy Roosevelt found his salvation in nature, the American wild. “I owe more than I can ever express to the West,” he said.

In a similar vein, young Trump, who gives the impression of somebody who knows he will never outrun his father’s shadow, said, “I owe the outdoors way too much” for keeping him out of trouble. One man repaid the debt. The other still could.

I invite you to follow me on Twitter (@nytegan).

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nKsP7p
EmailFacebook

Editorials, Op-Ed and Letters | CONTRIBUTING OP-ED WRITER
London Pride, Undaunted

By MATTHEW D’ANCONA
The Westminster Bridge and the Houses of Parliament reopened Thursday, after the attack on Wednesday. Niklas Halle'n/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
LONDON — “The growing good of the world is partly dependent on unhistoric acts,” George Eliot wrote in “Middlemarch.” On Thursday, in a statement to the House of Commons about the attack that had occurred right outside Parliament the day before, Prime Minister Theresa May echoed that sentiment, paying tribute to the “millions of acts of normality” that are the most powerful weapons against extremist violence. This was London’s counterattack: to show that it takes more than a murderous rampage through Westminster to shut down this mighty city.

Somber but undaunted, members of Parliament of all parties expressed their admiration for the courage of the police, doctors and nurses who had responded with such speed and vigor, rushing to help those who had been mowed down by car on Westminster Bridge. Five people died in the attack: a London teacher, an American visitor and a 75-year-old man; a police officer, Keith Palmer; and the attacker, who has been identified as a 52-year-old Briton, Khalid Masood. As many as 40 people were injured, several of whom remain in critical condition.

The deputy speaker of the House, Lindsay Hoyle, voiced the feelings of all his colleagues when he described Constable Palmer as “one of our village policemen.”

Westminster is indeed a village, and, as a commentator on Britain’s political scene, I treat it as my professional workplace. For all its architectural grandeur, it is really a noisy souk, a forum for gossip, ideas and haggling. Shortly before the attack, I had been to see a cabinet minister who was worried about a “difficult year ahead” for the government. When I returned, Parliament Square had been closed off by the police and the traffic was gridlocked. The sirens of ambulances told their own distressing story.

“You’d think they’d have sorted it out, for God’s sake,” a taxi driver complained out of his open window, to nobody in particular. As callous as that might sound, it was the authentic voice of London: unfazed, querulous, eccentric. The city’s cabbies are more fearful of traffic than they are of “nutters with knives” (another Londonism I overheard as I walked across Vauxhall Bridge, trying to find a way home).

Here’s what really counts: By Thursday morning, London was, if not quite back to normal, then certainly back in business. As I traveled through the south of the city, up to Chelsea and later over to King’s Cross, Londoners really were going about their lives as on any other day.

This behavior reflects something deeper than conscious defiance, I think. It would simply not occur to the 8.6 million citizens of this megalopolis to allow one man to send them into hiding. As they say in the East End, you’re having a laugh, aren’t you?

It is the stoicism of ancestral pride and present realism. Everyone in this city — as in New York, Tel Aviv, Paris, Brussels, Berlin — acknowledges the daily threat of low-tech terrorism.

Although MI5, the domestic security service, has achieved remarkable success in recent years, it cannot foil every conspiracy or lone wolf radicalized online by the bloodstained software of Islamism. Some years ago, we learned, the assailant had flitted across the intelligence community’s radar, as a peripheral figure. Absent a police state, it is impossible to monitor every such individual.

This was not the first attack like this on London and everyone knows it will not be the last. In such an age, and in such circumstances, the only way to proceed is — in the much-loved British slogan — to keep calm and carry on.

There was something else detectable in the fresh spring air, too. The last year, dominated by the Brexit referendum and its aftermath, has been one of brewing nativism and frequently ugly talk about immigration. Even as the injured were being treated, Britain’s equivalent of the alt-right tweeted with revolting ignorance about “illegals,” the very word that President Trump used, incorrectly, to describe Syrian refugees in a postelection interview with The Times of London. (In fact, the man named as the attacker was reportedly born in Kent, in southeast England.)

And speaking of the first family, Donald Trump Jr.’s ill-informed and insulting criticism of our mayor, Sadiq Khan, via Twitter did not go down well here. British anger at such brazen examples of political opportunism has been remarkable, and reached beyond social media. Britons love a political row, but they also know that there is a time and a place. This was most definitely not an occasion to score political points. The president’s son should not plan on visiting a London pub any time soon.

Of course, the divisions of the past year have not suddenly been healed, nor the poison put back in its bottle. But in conversations, on the radio, in the countenance of passers-by, you could sense a fresh recognition that this is the greatest city on earth because of, rather than in spite of, its extraordinary diversity.

Those who long for a monocultural London want something back that has never existed. Not since the glorious opening ceremony of the 2012 Olympics have I felt such pride to live in such a multifarious city, a planetary community.

“Yesterday, we saw the worst of humanity,” Mrs. May said, “but we will remember the best.” That’s absolutely right. It is a commonplace that pain and love are closely related, but true nonetheless. As Londoners absorbed the horror of what had happened, they quietly reaffirmed a principle that has served them well for centuries: that they — we — will not bow to fear.

This story has been updated to reflect news developments.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Matthew d’Ancona (@MatthewdAncona) is a political columnist for The Guardian and The Evening Standard and a contributing opinion writer.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nIn2zv
EmailFacebook

Editorials, Op-Ed and Letters | OP-ED CONTRIBUTORS
The Microbe Wars

By MICHAEL T. OSTERHOLM and MARK OLSHAKER
Niv Bavarsky
While the Trump administration is proposing significantly increased military spending to enhance our national security, it seems to have lost sight of the greatest national security threat of all: our fight against infectious disease.

We already spend far more on our military than any other country in the world. To help pay for the increases, President Trump wants to cut back many federal programs, including those that prepare us to wage war against microbes, the greatest and most lethal enemy we are ever likely to face. This is where “defense spending” needs to increase, significantly.

President Trump’s budget would cut funding for the National Institutes of Health by 18 percent. It would cut the State Department and the United States Agency for International Development, a key vehicle for preventing and responding to outbreaks before they reach our shores, by 28 percent. And the repeal of the Affordable Care Act would kill the billion-dollar Prevention and Public Health Fund, which provides funding for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to fight outbreaks of infectious disease. (While the budget also calls for the creation of an emergency fund to respond to outbreaks, there is no indication that it would offset the other cuts, or where the money would come from.)

Those cuts will not protect American citizens. They will diminish research and vaccine development and our ability to respond to the growing threats of antibiotic resistance and new infectious diseases.

Those agencies are already falling short, as we saw last year, when they couldn’t effectively respond to the Zika threat. What will they do when we face a real pandemic? With 7.4 billion people, 20 billion chickens and 400 million pigs now sharing the earth, we have created the ideal scenario for creating and spreading dangerous microbes. Trade and travel have connected most points on the globe in a matter of hours. More and more people are living in the microbe-rich megacity slums of the developing world.

By some estimates, the 1918-19 “Spanish” influenza killed more people than all the wars of the 20th century combined. Today, an influenza pandemic could be more devastating than an atom bomb. We are already witnessing an outbreak of influenza in birds — the H7N9 strain, in China — that could be the source for the next human pandemic. Since October, over 500 people have been infected; more than 34 percent have died. Most victims had contact with infected poultry, yet three recent clusters appear to be from person-to-person transmission. Will H7N9 mutate to become easily transmitted between humans? We don’t know. But without sufficient supplies of a vaccine, we are not prepared to stop it.

The spread of antibiotic-resistant microbes also continues at an ever faster rate. Last year a comprehensive review predicted that, if left unchecked, drug-resistant infections will kill more people worldwide by 2050 than cancer and diabetes combined. Without a global effort led by the United States to halt the spread of this resistance and support for development of new antibiotics, we are in danger of returning to a pre-antibiotic world in which a cut could prove deadly and surgery would not be worth the risk of infection.

Yellow fever, a mosquito-borne disease that can kill up to 50 percent of those who get seriously sick, is on the cusp of a major outbreak in some of Brazil’s largest cities, while MERS — Middle East Respiratory Syndrome — continues to infect people on the Arabian Peninsula. If an effective vaccine is not developed, it will continue to be transmitted around the world and cause fatal outbreaks like the one that closed Samsung Medical Center in Seoul to new patients for weeks. A similar outbreak could occur at the Mayo Clinic or Johns Hopkins Hospital.

And three years after the 2014 Ebola crisis, we still have no licensed vaccine or a plan for how to deploy one to prevent future outbreaks.

Finally, there is the danger of diseases deliberately spread by terrorists. Bill Gates, who has put much of his sizable financial resources as well as his brainpower into public health, wrote in the New England Journal of Medicine in 2015: “Of all the things that could kill more than 10 million people around the world, the most likely is an epidemic stemming from either natural causes or bioterrorism.” More recently, at this year’s Munich Security Conference, on the possibility of terrorist-engineered viruses he noted: “They are probably the only thing that can kill a billion.” For example, the science exists to reconstruct the smallpox genome from readily available lab materials, with the added possibility of altering the virus just enough that our existing vaccine would be ineffective.

The military has figured out how to convince congressional funders that the only way to maintain defense is to appropriate money before a crisis. You don’t start building the weapons and training all the soldiers after the first shot has been fired. The only way we can win the inevitable microbe wars is to do the same — to have new vaccines and antibiotics and trained personnel ready before the crisis hits. We cannot rely on pharmaceutical companies to create drugs and vaccines for markets that do not yet exist. Only the government can do this. The additional expenditures would be truly economical in terms of lives saved.

We are talking about national security on the most existential level.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Michael T. Osterholm is an epidemiologist and director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota. Mark Olshaker is a documentary filmmaker. They are the authors of “Deadliest Enemy: Our War Against Killer Germs.”

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nO1RMj
EmailFacebook

Editorials, Op-Ed and Letters | OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
My Grandmother Was a Nazi

By JESSICA SHATTUCK
The author’s grandmother, with three of her children, around 1943.
My grandparents were Nazis. It took me until recently to be able to say — or write — this. I used to think of and refer to them as “ordinary Germans,” as if that was a distinct and morally neutral category. But like many “ordinary Germans,” they were members of the Nazi Party — they joined in 1937, before it was mandatory.

My grandmother, who lived to be almost 100, was not, as I knew her, xenophobic or anti-Semitic; she did not seem temperamentally suited to hate. Understanding why and how this woman I knew and loved was swept up in a movement that became synonymous with evil has been, for me, a lifelong question.

She and my grandfather grew up in a working-class suburb of industrial Dortmund, where unemployment was rife; it had been occupied by the French after World War I. They joined the Nazi Party to be youth leaders in an agricultural education program called the Landjahr, or “year on the land,” in which teenagers got agricultural training. My grandmother always maintained that she had joined the Nazis as an “idealist” drawn to the vision of rebuilding Germany, returning to a simpler time and, perversely, promoting equality.

In the Landjahr, sons and daughters of factory workers would live and work side by side with sons and daughters of aristocrats and wealthy industrialists. She liked the idea of returning to “traditional” German life, away from the confusing push and pull of a global economy. Through research, I understand the Landjahr program was part of Hitler’s larger “Blut und Boden” (“blood and soil”) vision of making Germany a racially pure, agrarian society. The “racially pure” part was not something my grandmother ever mentioned.

“We didn’t know” was a kind of mantra for her on the long walks we took when I visited her at the farm she lived on, not far from where she grew up. “But didn’t you hear what Hitler was saying?” I would ask, grappling with the moral paradox of a loving grandmother who had been a Nazi.

My grandmother would shrug and answer something like, “He said a lot of things — I didn’t listen to all of them.” Didn’t she see Jews being rounded up and taken away, or at a minimum, harassed by the police? No, she maintained, not in the countryside where she lived. And anyway, she was focused on her own problems, on making ends meet and, once the war began, protecting her children.

This insistence on her own ignorance was an excuse, and I didn’t and still don’t accept it. It is impossible that she wouldn’t have known of Hitler’s virulent anti-Semitism and the Nazis’ objective of ousting Jews, whom Hitler had falsely (but successfully) linked to a Bolshevik terrorist threat. But did she follow what she knew of Hitler’s plan to its horrific, unimaginable end? In the late 1930s there was talk of sending Jews to Madagascar and to “settlements” in the east. But even if she believed this, why wasn’t she appalled at the injustice? At the dangerous stripping of rights?

In German there are two words for knowing: “wissen,” which is associated with wisdom and learning, and “kennen,” which is like being acquainted.

Acquaintance is, by definition, a surface understanding, susceptible to manipulation. When you are “acquainted with” something it’s much easier to see only part of the whole. Especially if the other half of what you hear and see is appealing. Hitler brought back jobs and opportunity, restored national pride and told seductive, simplifying lies; in the beginning, my grandmother, like many Germans, believed, for instance, that Germany’s war against Poland was begun in self-defense. (In 1939, Nazi operatives donned Polish Army uniforms and staged a takeover of a German radio station at Gleiwitz that Hitler then held up as an act of provocation by the Poles.)

“But what did you think when you started hearing the rumors about concentration camps?” I would press her. “Didn’t you ever listen to the foreign news reports?”

“Allied propaganda” was my grandmother’s answer. That’s what Hitler said it was. And she, like many Germans, trusted him. Her trust, apparently, relieved her of the need to understand.

How do I square the loving grandmother I knew until her death, in 2011, with this person? I have often worried that my attempt to understand the choices she made — and didn’t make — might be confused with an attempt to justify or forgive. But for me it is the only way I know to confront the past and take responsibility.

My grandmother heard what she wanted from a leader who promised simple answers to complicated questions. She chose not to hear and see the monstrous sum those answers added up to. And she lived the rest of her life with the knowledge of her indefensible complicity.

But in her willingness to talk about a subject few members of her generation would, she taught me the vital importance of knowing better.

Jessica Shattuck is the author of the novels “The Hazards of Good Breeding” and the forthcoming “The Women in the Castle.”

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nO4vlc
EmailFacebook

Editorials, Op-Ed and Letters | LETTERS
The Republicans’ Health Care Defeat

House Speaker Paul D. Ryan walked in the Capitol on Friday after a vote on the rules for debating the American Health Care Act, the bill to replace the Affordable Care Act known as Obamacare. Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times
To the Editor:

The Republican-led House of Representatives just presented President Trump and Speaker Paul Ryan with a stunning political defeat by failing to support the bill to repeal the Affordable Care Act (nytimes.com, March 24).

Is this what Mr. Trump calls the “Art of the Deal”? Perhaps his vaunted negotiating skills do not translate well into the political arena. In any event it was a totally self-inflicted wound. Why?

First, it was a mistake to start his legislative agenda with health care “reform.” He should have started with tax and regulatory reform, much less contentious and much easier to pass.

Second, it was self-inflicted because the Republican Party leaders (at least Mr. Ryan) took their own campaign rhetoric too literally. They had been beating the drum for repeal and replace Obamacare for so long they actually believed it was what the people wanted (the majority do not).

They could have chosen to just repeal it now, with an effective repeal date in one year. Then they could have tried to work on a bipartisan bill with more real popular support and passed it next year.

Mr. Trump, right about now I’m guessing you really wish you had the absolute power of Vladimir Putin to effect change; you do not. There are real limits to your power, as we have just seen amply demonstrated.

KEN DEROW, SWARTHMORE, PA.

To the Editor:

Former President Barack Obama enjoys vindication as a colossal embarrassment has been sustained by President Trump and House Republicans, both forced to share blame for the collapse of their much-heralded American Health Care Act.

Mr. Trump exerted brute force in an effort to secure votes for the plan, and he got nowhere. Republican House members recognized that their primary allegiance is not to their president, but to the constituents before whom they will appear on the ballot next year. Conservatives found the bill to be too generous, while moderates concluded that it was cruel.

Changes should be made to the Affordable Care Act to make it sustainable. If the Republicans want to make those changes, they will have to eat crow, and work with Democrats who will insist on maintaining the framework of the Obama legislation.

Could this stunning defeat cause President Trump to finally demonstrate some humility?

OREN M. SPIEGLER
UPPER ST. CLAIR, PA.

To the Editor:

After seven years of unrelenting contempt for President Obama and the Affordable Care Act, and with seven years to come up with an alternative, the Republicans, now that they have control of Congress and the White House, just showcased their incompetence.

The only surprise would be if, after this fiasco, they were willing to work with Democrats to actually improve the Affordable Care Act. I’m not holding my breath.

CHARLES MERRILL, NEW YORK

To the Editor:

Republicans have never liked the idea of a national health care system. President Obama’s triumph in passing the Affordable Care Act infuriated them into an obsession to make it fail by any means necessary, lying about its successes and convincing their base that it was a terrible system.

Now the Republicans are facing a crisis of their own making, when a bipartisan effort could have made the Affordable Care Act work for everyone at reasonable costs.

Of course, it would be so much easier (and less expensive) to expand Medicare to cover all Americans — but that would make Republicans’ heads explode, so it’s off the table.

CAROL ROBINSON, NEW YORK

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2n001nc
EmailFacebook

Editorials, Op-Ed and Letters | LETTERS
Anti-Immigrant Bias, Then and Now

Chinese and Japanese women and children wait to be processed at internment barracks in the late 1920s. Associated Press
To the Editor:

Re “135 Years Ago: Travel Ban News,” by David W. Dunlap (Times Insider, March 17):

Thank you for featuring the photograph of Asian women and children detained at the immigration station on Angel Island in San Francisco Bay. The stark image is a timely reminder that our country has always struggled with each wave of new immigrants and can often be seduced to fear and denigrate differences.

For Asian immigrants landing in San Francisco, Angel Island was the first stop. Opened in 1910 specifically to enforce a populist ban on most Asian immigration, the island’s immigration station, until 1940, processed and detained over 500,000 new arrivals.

Immigrants were locked up in cramped quarters, fed inferior food, and subjected to long medical exams, interrogation and detention for as long as two years. While waiting for their ordeal to be over, Chinese immigrants carved poems into the barracks walls to forever etch their feelings of sadness, loneliness and fear while imprisoned on Angel Island.

As a fifth-generation American, I deeply hope that our country will remember the lessons from its history of Asian immigrants 100 years ago so we do not repeat the errors of the 20th century in the 21st.

KATHERINE TOY, SAN FRANCISCO

The writer is president of the board of directors, Angel Island Immigration Station Foundation.

To the Editor:

Re “Green Beer and Rank Hypocrisy” (Op-Ed, March 17): As a proud Irish-American, I want to thank Fintan O’Toole for his perceptive analysis of the lack of historical perspective shown by President Trump’s Irish-American advisers, who ignore the similarities of the discrimination experienced by their immigrant ancestors to what the Trump administration is trying to inflict on modern-day Latino and Muslim immigrants.

This hypocrisy or purposely myopic view of course extends to prominent Irish-Americans beyond Mr. Trump’s immediate advisers. Paul Ryan, with his “are there no workhouses?” view of the poor, and the anti-immigrant rhetoric of Irish-American commentators like Sean Hannity and Bill O’Reilly are further examples of certain individuals of an ethnic group, once they have achieved success, choosing to forget their roots.

Of course as a native of Queens, like our president, I am still just getting used to another terrible irony: our virulently anti-immigrant president coming from one of the most ethnically diverse counties in our country.

RICK O’CONNELL
LITTLE NECK, QUEENS

The writer is a retired U.S. Customs and Border Protection official.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2n0icJd
EmailFacebook

Editorials, Op-Ed and Letters | LETTER
Donald Trump Jr.’s Tweet

Donald Trump Jr. in February in Vancouver, Canada. Jeff Vinnick/Getty Images
To the Editor:

Re “President’s Son Criticizes London Mayor, to Some Britons’ Dismay” (news article, March 23):

I am a Brit who is incandescent with rage after reading about Donald Trump Jr.’s tweet in response to the recent terror attack.

The total lack of the compassion and respect that is surely to be expected from a president and his offspring is unacceptable in a civilized world. In two short months we have seen America reduced from the leader of the Western world to the pariah of the Western world. Are Americans proud of this change? Surely not — certainly not those Americans of my acquaintance.

It is important for people like me to make their feelings known. It is equally important for the many honorable Americans to respond, to stand up and be counted. Enough is enough.

MALCOLM GERLOCH
CANBERRA, AUSTRALIA

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mZ5v1r
EmailFacebook

Editorials, Op-Ed and Letters | LETTER
Ivanka Trump’s Clearance

The Ivanka Trump store at Trump Tower in Manhattan. Under a new arrangement, Ms. Trump will no longer appear in ads for her brand, and she has separated her business and personal social media accounts. Hilary Swift for The New York Times
To the Editor:

Re “Under Trust, Trump Heir Keeps Power Over Brand” (Business Day, March 21):

As a former National Security Agency employee experienced in the process of “extreme vetting” to secure my top-secret clearance as a condition of employment, I question the casual manner in which Ivanka Trump, the president’s daughter, is being given access to classified information.

With no official position within this administration, where is the proof of her “need to know”? With no oath of office or other pledge of confidentiality, how will she be held accountable for violation of secrecy rules? Indeed, what training will she have received before being made privy to such information?

Donald Trump’s on-the-job-training, seat-of-the-pants presidency and total disregard for the seriousness of this office will cause damage requiring decades to repair.

BEVERLEY H. KITTEL
BELLINGHAM, WASH.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2n08TJD
EmailFacebook

NEXT SECTION: NEW YORK

PREVIOUS SECTION: NATIONAL
OBITUARIES
Skip Williamson, 72, Dies; Drew Underground Comics

By RICHARD SANDOMIR

Skip Williamson with a portrait of Snappy Sammy Smoot in 1971. Chicago Sun-Times
Skip Williamson, a rambunctious creator of underground comics that merged his radical politics with his love of scatological humor, died on March 16 in a hospital in Albany, near his home in Wilmington, Vt. He was 72.

The cause was renal failure, his daughter Molly Hiland Parmer said.

For the underground cartoonists of the 1960s and ’70s, sex, drugs, profanity and violence were as common as superheroes in mainstream comics, and Mr. Williamson was among the most provocative. His characters were often visual grotesques, like Snappy Sammy Smoot, a dandy with googly eyes, gigantic red (or pink) lips, pomaded black hair and a delicate mustache. Smoot’s naïveté placed him in counterpoint with the era’s changing politics and mores.

Mr. Williamson found President Richard M. Nixon a particularly inviting target for caricature, distorting him a few degrees more than editorial cartoonists did. In a two-panel cartoon published in Class War Comix, Nixon wonders how to react to a phony newspaper article that accuses Vice President Spiro T. Agnew of killing thousands by flatulence.

“We’re in serious trouble, Spiggy,” a fretful Nixon says, applying a powder puff to his 5 o’clock shadow with one hand and holding lipstick in the other. “Cruel anarchists have perpetrated an incredibly effective, image-shattering hoax on the American public.”


Slide Show | The Artwork of Skip Williamson Skip Williams was among the most provocative of the underground cartoonists of the 1960s and ’70s.
Mr. Williamson was one of those anarchists. He aligned himself in the 1960s with the Youth International Party, better known as the Yippies. He knew its leaders, Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin. He edited a comic book, Conspiracy Capers, to raise money to pay the legal fees of the radicals known as the Chicago Seven — including Mr. Hoffman and Mr. Rubin — who were tried for conspiring to disrupt the 1968 Democratic National Convention. He was a courtroom artist during the trial and also helped illustrate Mr. Hoffman’s prankish best seller “Steal This Book.”

“I was always more political than most of the other underground artists,” Mr. Williamson told The Comics Journal in 1986. “Or antipolitical. I believe honestly that if you vote for these bastards, you only encourage them.”

The protesting outside the convention — and the violent response by the Chicago police — radicalized him, and his work. He waded into the protests, he said, and was tear-gassed.

“I was doing psychedelic cartoons,” he said in “Pigheaded,” a documentary about Mr. Williamson by John Kinhart that has been shown at a few film festivals. “After that, it was, ‘Kill the pigs.’”

Mervyn Wilton Williamson Jr. was born in San Antonio on Aug. 19, 1944, and grew up in Austin, Tex., Lynchburg, Va., and Canton, Mo. His father was a humanities professor and minister, and his mother, the former Rhodie Lott, was a homemaker.

When he was a boy, his troublemaking led his grandmother to nickname him after Percy Crosby’s mischievous comic strip character Skippy. Mr. Williamson’s high jinks extended to stealing comic books from a local candy store and drawing Mickey Mouse in the margins of a notebook, which led to his being disciplined by his third-grade teacher.

He became a pacifist because of his father’s experience in World War II: Mervyn Sr. was shot down during a bombing raid over Romania and was still designated missing in action when Skip was born. The father was, in fact, a prisoner of war whose captors showed him the bodies of children who had died in the raid. The experience led to undiagnosed post-traumatic stress disorder, his children said in interviews in “Pigheaded.”

Still, Mr. Williamson loved to infuriate his strait-laced, professorial father with his love of comics. “I made comics because it was an anti-intellectual behavior,” he says in the documentary.

In 1961 he sold his first cartoon, to Help!, a satirical magazine founded by Harvey Kurtzman, whose irreverent, pioneering work at Mad magazine in the previous decade made him a prominent influence on future underground cartoonists like Mr. Williamson, R. Crumb and Gilbert Shelton. The cartoon showed two garbage cans in New Orleans that are identical but for their signs.

One says “White trash”; the other, “Negro trash.”

He later recalled that the comedian Dick Gregory showed the cartoon to Jack Paar on “The Tonight Show.” “Boy, what an ego boost for a high school kid in Canton, Mo.,” Mr. Williamson told The Comics Journal. “That really gave me a shot to want to keep going.”

As underground comics surged in popularity in the late 1960s, Mr. Williamson and his fellow cartoonist Jay Lynch created Bijou Funnies, a comic book that showcased their work and that of other artists.

Mr. Lynch died on March 5.

“He was heartbroken” by Mr. Lynch’s death, said Harriett Hiland, the third of Mr. Williamson’s four wives, who stayed friendly with him after their divorce. “We had a long talk about Jay dying. He was terribly down about that.”

Mr. Williamson never gave up on Sammy Smoot and the gallery of other characters in his comics — or comix, as underground practitioners preferred to spell it — but the genre faded. He found work at men’s magazines like Hustler, Gallery and Playboy, where he was an art editor and created a comics section, Playboy Funnies.

For Playboy, he illustrated a short story by the science-fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke, “When the Twerms Came,” about aliens conquering Earth with a Psychedelic Ray, an Itching Beam, a Diarrhea Bomb and Tumescent Aerosol Spray. Mr. Williamson turned the short tale into a silly, preposterous visual tableau, with one Twerm munching on a hot dog and another watching “The Mod Squad.”

In later years, he began to paint large acrylic canvasses and had shows at the Vinson Gallery in Decatur, Ga., and the Eyedrum Art & Music Gallery in Atlanta.

“At one of his shows in Atlanta,” said Patrick Rosenkranz, an underground comics historian, “somebody asked him to move one of his paintings, of Jesus packing heat. They had hung it so you could see it through the gallery door and got complaints.”

Two years ago Mr. Williamson married Adrienne Morales, who survives him, as do his daughters, Ms. Parmer, Nikki Williamson Weiner, and Megan and Rita Williamson; two grandchildren; a sister, Rhonda Baker; and his brothers, Joseph and Alan. His previous marriages ended in divorce.

Mr. Williamson’s sympathies might have rested with the Yippies for a while, but he had little trust in politicians of any stripe.

In one panel of a comic, Sammy Smoot stands between two figures: a crew-cut, vampire-fanged, cigar-smoking “conservative” and a cool-looking “liberal” wearing buttons that exhort “Save Soviet Jews,” “Boycott Lettuce” and “Keep On Truckin’.”

“Liberals are patronizing egomaniacs,” Smoot says. “And conservatives are vicious power brokers!”

Read more obituaries and follow our coverage on Twitter.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nDRkU4
EmailFacebook

OBITUARIES
William Keeler, 86; Backed Abuse Victims

By SAM ROBERTS
Cardinal William H. Keeler at St Peter’s Basilica in Vatican City in 2005. Marco Longari/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
Cardinal William H. Keeler, who as archbishop of Baltimore strove to improve relations between the Roman Catholic Church and American Jews, and who championed victims of sexual abuse by priests, died on Thursday in Catonsville, Md. He was 86.

No cause was specified, but he was injured in a car accident in 2006 and had undergone brain surgery since then, an archdiocesan spokesman said.

As leader of the oldest Roman Catholic diocese in the United States and later as president of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops (now the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops), Cardinal Keeler was considered a centrist.

Though he held to the church’s well-established positions against abortion, same-sex marriage, human cloning and stem cell research from fetal tissue, he also led bishops in denouncing racism, welfare cutbacks and the scapegoating of immigrants. And he disagreed with more conservative bishops by opposing a flat ban on offering communion to politicians who supported abortion rights.

Cardinal Keeler was at the forefront of building interfaith bonds between his church and Jews, Muslims and the Greek Orthodox as well as Lutherans and other Protestant groups.

In 1987, as chairman of the bishops’ conference Committee for Ecumenical and Interreligious Affairs, he was instrumental in arranging Pope John Paul II’s meetings with Jewish leaders in Miami and with Protestant leaders in Columbia, S.C. And he was credited with playing influential roles in the Vatican’s decision in 1993 to establish diplomatic relations with Israel and in a statement by American bishops in 2002 disavowing attempts to convert Jews to Christianity.

“He came from the pioneering generation of post-1965 Catholic leaders,” said Rabbi James Rudin, the senior interreligious adviser of the American Jewish Committee. “There has been more positive done in Catholic-Jewish relations in the last 50 years than in the first 1,900, and Cardinal Keeler was the chief architect of that.”

His response to the sexual abuse scandals was halting at first. When The Boston Globe riveted nationwide attention in 2002 with its reports of widespread abuse by priests along with church efforts to cover up the scandal, Cardinal Keeler took issue with the news media, accusing them of creating a “feeding frenzy.”

But within a few months he became the first bishop to publicly identify priests who had been credibly accused of child abuse. He posted the names of 57 on the website of his archdiocese, along with an accounting of the $5.6 million that he said the archdiocese had paid up to that point in settlements, legal fees and counseling.

Other bishops, emboldened, did the same.

Victims and their advocates praised Cardinal Keeler, but defenders of the church criticized him and the other bishops as having betrayed the priests in their dioceses.

“I think Cardinal Keeler has taken a very bold and courageous and pastorally sensitive approach,” Bishop Wilton D. Gregory, president of the bishops’ conference, said at the time.

In 2002, Cardinal Keeler testified on behalf of a man who had been accused of attempted murder in the shooting of a priest who was later convicted of molesting him as a teenager. The man, Dontee D. Stokes, was acquitted of felony charges.

William Henry Keeler was born on March 4, 1931, in San Antonio, to Thomas Henry, who sold steel products, and the former Margaret Conway, a schoolteacher. He was raised in Lebanon, Pa.

An Eagle Scout who mingled with boys of other faiths, William decided on the priesthood early on.

“I wondered about a way of saying thank you to God and giving back to the church the gifts that God had given to me,” he told The Catholic Review of Baltimore. “It was as simple as that. For me, becoming a priest was not complicated.”

He graduated with a bachelor of arts degree from St. Charles Borromeo Seminary in Wynnewood, Pa., in 1952. He earned another bachelor’s degree from St. Charles Seminary at Overbrook in Philadelphia. He received both a licentiate in sacred theology and a doctorate in canon law from Pontifical Gregorian University in Rome.

After being ordained in 1955, he was a special adviser at the Second Vatican Council in the early 1960s. He was bishop of Harrisburg, Pa., from 1983 to 1989, when he was named archbishop of Baltimore, a statewide diocese with nearly 500,000 congregants. He was appointed a cardinal by Pope John Paul II in 1994.

In Baltimore, he raised tens of millions of dollars to maintain the Catholic school system and to restore the Basilica of the National Shrine of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the country’s first Roman Catholic cathedral.

He is survived by a sister, Julia A. Keeler Graham.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nObWsu
EmailFacebook

NEXT SECTION: EDITORIALS, OP-ED AND LETTERS

PREVIOUS SECTION: EDITORIALS, OP-ED AND LETTERS
NEW YORK
A Rise in Public Explanations After Prosecutors Decline to Indict

By BENJAMIN WEISER

Federal and state prosecutors opted last week not to bring charges against Mayor Bill de Blasio or any of his aides after investigating their campaign financing efforts. Joshua Bright for The New York Times
When federal and state prosecutors in New York opted last week not to bring charges against Mayor Bill de Blasio or any of his aides after investigating their campaign financing efforts, the mayor was left cleared but not unscathed.

In an extraordinary 10-page letter that it released publicly, the Manhattan district attorney's office essentially laid out what had been its case against Mr. de Blasio, saying that certain acts had appeared to be “contrary to the intent and spirit” of campaign finance laws.

The United States attorney’s office issued a far more sparse statement, but still noted several instances where the mayor and others acting on his behalf had solicited donations from people who “sought official favors from the city, after which the mayor made or directed inquiries to relevant city agencies on behalf of those donors.”

The two statements marked an apparent trend: Across the nation, prosecutors seem to have become more willing to speak publicly about the decision on their part not to file charges in high-profile cases.

In the past two years, the Justice Department has issued statements to announce and explain the lack of federal charges after investigations into the fatal shooting of Trayvon Martin in Sanford, Fla.; the death of a teenager whose body was found in a rolled-up gym mat in a Georgia high school; and the use of force by a white sheriff’s deputy, who flipped a black female student out of her chair and threw her across a high school classroom floor in South Carolina.


The office of the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance, Jr., center, has issued statements in at least a half dozen prominent cases since 2012 in which it did not file charges. Anthony Lanzilote for The New York Times
On occasion, the authorities have gone even further, calling conduct into question even when the actions were not prosecutable.

Perhaps the most notable example occurred last year, when the director of the F.B.I., James B. Comey, announced that the bureau was closing an investigation into the handling of classified information by Hillary Clinton, the Democratic presidential candidate. Although the bureau found no evidence that Ms. Clinton or her colleagues had intended to violate the law, Mr. Comey said, there was evidence that they had been “extremely careless.”

Mr. Comey acknowledged that his statement was “unusual” and that he was including “more detail about our process than I ordinarily would, because I think the American people deserve those details in a case of intense public interest.”

The fact that prosecutors and investigators are speaking more freely has fueled debate among legal experts over whether the authorities, when closing their investigations without filing charges, should issue such comments.

“I think it is happening more often, and more prominently,” said Rebecca Roiphe, a former assistant district attorney in Manhattan who now teaches at New York Law School. “I think it’s extremely problematic.”

A prosecutor’s decision to offer details of an investigation and explain why charges were not being brought would seem to be a model of transparency, especially in cases involving police shootings or other alleged civil rights violations, when families and communities may not trust the authorities to investigate fairly.

At the same time, legal experts said, such statements could potentially allow a prosecutor to level criticisms without a filter, depriving the recipient of the ability to respond in kind.

“My view is that a prosecutor has two choices: indict or shut up,” said Stephen Gillers, a law professor at New York University.

Daniel C. Richman, a law professor at Columbia and former federal prosecutor in Manhattan, said he recently asked a law student, Kathleen Ann Marini, to conduct research into how frequently United States prosecutors had issued statements after declining to charge. A quick search turned up more than two dozen cases since 2010, the vast majority in the civil rights and public corruption area.

“The pattern does not surprise me,” Professor Richman said. “These are really hard questions, when you consider that all too often the failure to prosecute someone is taken incorrectly as his vindication.”

“If you’re a prosecutor,” he added, “the safest move is always to never say anything and let the target twist in the wind.”

To be sure, there have been instances in decades past when prosecutors have chosen to issue critical statements even when deciding not to bring charges. In 1993, the Litchfield County State’s Attorney in Connecticut said that he had “probable cause” to charge Woody Allen with sexually molesting his young daughter but then declined to file charges. Mr. Allen has vigorously and consistently denied any wrongdoing in the case.

Sometime such announcements appear to be welcomed by the subjects of investigations. In January 2016, Preet Bharara, then the United States attorney in Manhattan, said in a one-paragraph statement that his office would not charge Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo after “a thorough investigation of interference” with the operation of an anti-corruption commission.

“We were always confident there was no illegality here, and we appreciate the U.S. attorney clarifying this for the public record,” Mr. Cuomo’s lawyer, Elkan Abramowitz, said then.

Benjamin L. Crump, the lead lawyer for the family of Trayvon Martin, said this week that the Justice Department’s statement in 2015 explaining that it had found “insufficient evidence” to file criminal civil rights charges against the man who killed him, George Zimmerman, was “inadequate,” but it at least gave “some insight” into how the decision had been reached.

“My feeling is that people deserve answers,” Mr. Crump said.

A year ago, Mr. Bharara issued a long statement explaining the decision not to charge a white officer, Richard Haste, in the fatal shooting of an unarmed black teenager, Ramarley Graham, in the bathroom of his Bronx home in 2012.

The officer’s lawyer, Stuart London, said this week that the statement was helpful in clarifying the guidelines for prosecuting such cases.

“It just spoke in terms of how high the bar is for a federal civil rights indictment,” he said. His client has denied any wrongdoing.

The office of the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance, Jr., has issued statements in at least a half dozen prominent cases since 2012 in which it did not file charges.

The cases involved public allegations against one or more people, Mr. Vance’s spokeswoman, Joan Vollero, said, “and there was an overwhelming public interest in having the ultimate conclusions disclosed.”

In one such matter, the office spent more than three months investigating a widely publicized rape allegation against the lawyer Sanford A. Rubenstein, who had maintained his innocence and had not been arrested.

Mr. Rubenstein’s lawyer, Benjamin Brafman, said on Wednesday that he firmly believed that if an investigation had received widespread news coverage, “it is not only appropriate, it is absolutely necessary for that person to be publicly cleared” when the investigation is completed.

Mr. Vance’s 10-page letter about the de Blasio investigation was in response to a 2016 referral from the State Board of Elections, which contained serious allegations and was widely described in news reports.

Given those circumstances, Ms. Vollero said, “we concluded that fairness to those involved, coupled with the public’s right to know, compelled us to be as transparent as possible in announcing our conclusions.”

Joon H. Kim, the acting United States attorney in Manhattan, noted in his half-page statement that although it was rare for his office to comment on the status of an investigation, “we believe it appropriate in this case at this time, in order not to unduly influence the upcoming campaign and mayoral election.”

Mr. de Blasio thanked both offices for publishing their conclusions “in a timely manner,” and said the results confirmed that he and his staff had acted in a manner that was “legal and appropriate and ethical throughout.”

The legal experts had mixed reactions to the prosecutors’ public comments.

Bennett L. Gershman, a law professor at Pace University, criticized both statements for making “insinuations of misconduct” which he said was “improper, totally beyond what a prosecutor should do.”

Professor Gillers also questioned Mr. Vance’s public letter, saying it “gave the mayor’s opponents, electoral and otherwise, a powerful sound bite to use against him.”

But Professor Gillers said Mr. Kim’s statement was the rare appropriate exception to his view that prosecutors at such times should remain silent.

“The public had an interest in a brief explanation of the reasons for the decision, given the political context,” he said.

Doris Burke contributed research.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mY7cMu
EmailFacebook

NEW YORK
Author Who Faced Violent Campus Protest Gets Muted Response in New York

By KATE TAYLOR
Charles Murray, the co-author of “The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life,” spoke at Columbia on Thursday evening and N.Y.U. on Friday. Christopher Lee for The New York Times
Student protesters held up signs saying “No Eugenicists on Campus” and “Eugenics Is a Fascist’s Favorite Subject” as Charles Murray, the conservative scholar, spoke at New York University on Friday afternoon, but his talk proceeded, interrupted only by the chants of annoyance coming from outside the building.

The event, along with an even quieter appearance at Columbia on Thursday evening, offered a contrast with Mr. Murray’s more raucous reception at Middlebury College in Vermont this month. There, violent demonstrations led to a planned onstage interview being conducted via live stream and to a professor sustaining a concussion as she tried to protect Mr. Murray from protesters, events that came to symbolize to some the unwillingness of elite college students to engage with those with whom they disagree.

Mr. Murray, a political scientist and libertarian, is known mostly for his 1994 book, “The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life,” written with Richard J. Herrnstein, which argued that economic and social success in America is partly a matter of genetics. The book did not advocate the practice of eugenics.

The Southern Poverty Law Center has called Mr. Murray a white nationalist, a label others have disputed.

Mr. Murray has been in demand recently as a speaker to conservative groups on college campuses, mostly because of his 2012 book, “Coming Apart,” about the increasing class divide in American society. Some political observers view it as having been prescient about the white, working class resentment they believe fueled the election of President Trump.

Protesters outside a Columbia University hall where Charles Murray spoke on Thursday. Liberal activists say his work has promoted eugenics. Christopher Lee for The New York Times
Mr. Murray, however, opposed Mr. Trump as a candidate and on Thursday night at Columbia referred to him as “a despicable man.”

Both talks were organized by student chapters of the American Enterprise Institute, where Mr. Murray is a resident scholar.

At N.Y.U., roughly two dozen students protested in the intermittent rain outside the Torch Club, on Waverly Place, where the talk took place. One, Lysander Reid-Powell, a sophomore from New Mexico studying environmental science and media studies, said he had not read any of Mr. Murray’s books and, in fact, had never heard of Mr. Murray until Thursday, when a professor mentioned he would be speaking. He said he later read about Mr. Murray on the Southern Poverty Law Center’s website.

“N.Y.U. always prides itself on its diversity, its inclusivity, its open-mindedness, and they never fail to tout the international student body or their commitment to different religions,” Mr. Reid-Powell said. “And we see here that it’s very hypocritical and very superficial when they give a platform, which is, in effect, an endorsement, to somebody with very hateful, very poisonous views.”

Tickets to the talk were free, and only those who had them were admitted; Mr. Reid-Powell said that by the time many of the protesters heard about the speech the tickets were gone.

Mr. Murray began his remarks by saying that he was grateful that he had been escorted into the building by security officers.

In both talks, he largely discussed themes from “Coming Apart,” in which he argued that American society was increasingly split into a cognitive elite, which lived separately from other Americans, had its own distinct cultural tastes, and intermarried, and an uneducated white lower class in which the values of marriage, religion, industriousness and honesty were in dangerous decline.

He urged his audiences not to isolate themselves in what he has called “super Zips,” or areas where only wealthy, highly educated people live.

Mr. Murray spoke of his upbringing in Newton, Iowa. “I love this traditional American culture,” he said, where rich, middle-class and working-class families all lived in the same neighborhoods. “I don’t want to lose it. There are no social policies that are going to bring it back.”

At N.Y.U., during a question and answer period, a student from Bradford, Pa., said he had become sympathetic to the cause of white nationalism, and white identity politics, because of the disdain with which the larger culture views the white working class.

In responding, Mr. Murray acknowledged his reputation among some of his critics.

“I know that you’ve heard that I’m a white nationalist,” he said, adding, “It’s real hard to be a libertarian and a white nationalist.”

Only about 15 protesters turned out to protest Mr. Murray’s appearance at Columbia on Thursday, which took place at Alfred Lerner Hall, and they made no effort to enter the event or disrupt the talk.

One of the protesters, Alex Wolf, a professor of biology at Bronx Community College, said he had been inspired by what had happened at Middlebury. But he said when he had tried to get his students from the Bronx to come to protest, they were too busy with midterms.

Alexandra Levine contributed reporting.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mWNFvV
EmailFacebook

NEXT SECTION: THE ARTS

PREVIOUS SECTION: NEW YORK
THE ARTS | CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
Why This Wheelchair Matters

By NEIL GENZLINGER

Madison Ferris, foreground, as Laura, and Sally Field as Amanda in “The Glass Menagerie.” Sara Krulwich/The New York Times
There’s a wheelchair onstage at the Belasco Theater, and it’s drawing an abundance of attention. There’s also a wheelchair onstage at a small theater not far away, and it’s drawing practically no attention at all. The gulf between the two says quite a lot.

At the Belasco, the Broadway house on West 44th Street, the wheelchair is one of the conspicuous elaborations the director Sam Gold has brought to his production of “The Glass Menagerie,” the beloved Tennessee Williams drama. The chair isn’t just a prop; it’s a necessity for the actress playing Laura, Madison Ferris, who has muscular dystrophy.

That bit of casting is, of course, a significant change from the shy girl with a limp that Williams called for in his play. And Mr. Gold’s staging leaves no doubt that Ms. Ferris is not some able-bodied actress pretending to have a disability. He has her enter by painstakingly climbing stairs, one of several times that he takes her out of the wheelchair and confronts the audience with the difficulties of having severely limited mobility.

Some leading critics have objected to the transformation of Williams’s subtle play about a family enveloped in denial into something more strident. The kindest objections say that Mr. Gold’s interpretation simply doesn’t mesh well with the text; harsher ones on theater chat boards have called his use of Ms. Ferris exploitative.

Perhaps these detractors are focusing on moments like the one in which Amanda, Laura’s mother, tells her: “You’re not crippled. You just have a little defect — hardly noticeable, even!” How can such a line make sense when there’s a wheelchair onstage?


Ms. Field helping Ms. Ferris onto the stage at the opening of “The Glass Menagerie.” Sara Krulwich/The New York Times
For one thing, this is a self-described “memory play,” told through the recollections of Laura’s brother, Tom (played by Joe Mantello). And memory is an interpretation of the past, not a literal playback of it.

But, more than that, to live with a child with a disability is to be both isolated — as this family is — and susceptible to what seems to others like an unreality. My own daughter, who has a serious disability called Rett syndrome, is just three years younger than the 23-year-old Laura. Is it easy for me to imagine a parent who sees a vastly different child than the outside world sees? You bet.

As for the charge of exploitation, I read that as, “It was unpleasant to see Ms. Ferris pull herself along the floor by her arms; I prefer that people with disabilities remain invisible, as they so often are.” Broadway audiences are accustomed to seeing perfect bodies doing entertaining dance steps. Guess what, Broadway? One in five Americans has a disability, according to the census bureau.

Nine blocks north and four blocks west of the Belasco, at the A.R.T./New York Theaters, Theater Breaking Through Barriers has a program of shorts running through Sunday. The company, which has been around since 1979, stages productions using actors with disabilities as well as able-bodied actors.

The five plays on its current program include works by Neil LaBute and Bekah Brunstetter, a producer of the TV series “This Is Us.” Nicholas Viselli, the company’s artistic director, has put quirky interstitials between the plays — a song, some monologues. Ryan Haddad, who is gay and has cerebral palsy, steals the show with a funny, deeply personal piece called “Hi, Are You Single?”

This is the type of production that’s most likely to showcase actors with disabilities: intimate theater, small audience, $25 ticket. The program (which is called “The Other Plays: Short Plays About Diversity and Otherness”) is thought-provoking, but it feels 1,000 miles from the mainstream represented by the Belasco, where the best seat for “The Glass Menagerie” can set you back more than $200.

Mr. Gold’s brashest stroke in a production full of them may be the bridging of that divide — taking a theatrical universe that has existed for some time on the outskirts and putting it on a Broadway marquee featuring the well-known names of Mr. Mantello and Sally Field, who plays Amanda.

He’s not the first to do so — think back, for instance, to the breathtaking Deaf West reimagining of “Big River” in 2003, featuring a lot of deaf and hard-of-hearing actors and sign language, or to the same company’s 2015 “Spring Awakening” (which also had an actor who uses a wheelchair). But it remains a rare occurrence, and as a result Broadway remains unrepresentative of the full range of humanity.

So do television, film and most other forms, though inroads are being made there, too. Does the casting of an actor with cerebral palsy to play a character with cerebral palsy on the ABC sitcom “Speechless” seem manipulative? How about the coming introduction of a character with autism on “Sesame Street?”

Sometimes, what seems a cheesy gimmick or instance of exploitation is really just the front edge of needed change. Some theatergoers were probably outraged the first time a black Juliet was cast against a white Romeo. Did that change how some of Shakespeare’s lines registered and imbue the play with new meanings? Sure. Is race-blind casting now widely accepted and the theatergoing experience richer for it? Yes.

Mr. Gold’s production is hardly perfect. If you figure out that thing with keeping the house lights up for a third of the show, let me know. But at least with the Laura character, he has done what he intended.

“I’m not very interested in pretend,” he has said. “I’m interested in putting people onstage. I want people. And I want a world that reflects the real world.”

It’s worth contemplating what that means from the audience’s perspective. On those chat boards, some writers have complained that Ms. Ferris isn’t very good. Here’s the thing: We have been conditioned to define good acting in terms of facial expressions, comic timing, physical bits. An actor with a disability, especially one involving muscle control or cognitive impairment, isn’t necessarily going to be able to give the kind of performance we’re used to. Will Ms. Ferris impress someone looking for that kind of performance? Probably not. But she gives the most realistic portrayal of a person with muscular dystrophy that I’ve ever seen.

In any case, the overall package worked for me and showed me a different play, just as Deaf West did with “Big River,” one of my favorite musicals. The Amanda of this “Menagerie” is more in denial than other Amandas; the gentleman caller, played by Finn Wittrock, who sees past Laura’s disability, is all the nobler. And — especially given the time frame of the play, an era before curb cuts and the Americans With Disabilities Act, Tom’s decision to leave his family is not so much a personal liberation as a cruel abandonment.

I don’t really care whether this is what Williams intended. What I admire is the attempt, and the fact that this production has people talking about something other than whether Ms. Field’s Amanda is better or worse than Cherry Jones’s in 2013 or Jessica Lange’s in 2005. Debates like that are the product of a theater of complacency. Debates like the one Mr. Gold has unleashed are what keep theater vigorous and challenging.

The Glass Menagerie
Belasco Theater, Manhattan; glassmenagerieonbroadway.com.


The Other Plays: Short Plays About Diversity and Otherness
Through Sunday. A.R.T./New York Theaters, Manhattan; tbtb.org.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nM4OwK
EmailFacebook

THE ARTS
Arts Without Funding? It Can Be Done, Kansas Says

By MITCH SMITH
Brenda Meder, the executive director of the Hays Arts Council in Hays, Kan.: “When what you’re about is important enough to you, you will find a way. And that’s how it always is with the arts.” Steve Hebert for The New York Times
HAYS, Kan. — When taxpayer money for the arts started getting tight in Kansas, Brenda Meder began scrubbing toilets at the gallery she oversees here, rather than paying for custodial services. She cooked the finger food for receptions, instead of using a caterer. And she signed up more dues-paying members of the Hays Arts Council, a 49-year-old organization where she is the executive director and only full-time employee.

For Ms. Meder, a great purpose is at stake. There are the traveling performers’ visits to elementary schools that she arranges. The classes on stained glass and drawing. The quarterly art walks she organizes in the brick-paved downtown, where storefronts transform into makeshift galleries that draw hundreds of spectators from Hays and beyond.

And for the last six years, Ms. Meder has sustained all that without consistent financing from state and federal sources.

“When what you’re about is important enough to you, you will find a way,” said Ms. Meder, who grew up around here, roughly halfway between Denver and Kansas City, Mo. “And that’s how it always is with the arts.”

President Trump’s call last week to eliminate the National Endowment for the Arts prompted panic and outrage in major cities and other parts of America where public funds have sustained generations of artists. But in some ways, Mr. Trump is following a path laid in 2011 by Gov. Sam Brownback of Kansas when he defunded this state’s Arts Commission and left local organizations like Ms. Meder’s scrambling to find other sources of revenue.

A ceramic piece included in an exhibition of works by Kansas artists at the Hays Arts Council. Steve Hebert for The New York Times
Hays, a college town with about 21,000 residents, is a case study of how the arts can continue to thrive when public funds dry up. But it is also a cautionary tale of the sometimes-hidden costs.

Ms. Meder fears that artists in Kansas have become more siloed and less engaged with one another in recent years, as financing for conferences has become more elusive and eligibility for grant money has fluctuated. Since Mr. Brownback’s cuts in 2011, some public money has returned to Kansas, but arts advocates here say they have learned to forge ahead — and in some cases scale back their ambitions — without always counting on that assistance.

“We’re gaining ground, but yet we’re staying even,” said Toni Smith, the executive director of the Baker Arts Center in Liberal, Kan., who credited increased donor support for helping maintain programs.

Hays has weathered the uncertainty better than many places. Generations here have enjoyed band concerts and theater on the campus of Fort Hays State University, and the Arts Council claims to be the oldest arts-supporting organization of its type in Kansas. Both the city and county governments provide funding for the council, which has an annual budget of roughly $125,000, and residents of all political stripes cite the creative scene as a point of pride.

“A lot of my good Republican friends are out there, conservative and moderates, and they’re taking it in, they’re going to all of the venues and taking in the live music and the art,” said Henry Schwaller IV, a Democrat who serves on the Hays City Commission and who was chairman of the Kansas Arts Commission when Governor Brownback withdrew its funding. “It’s just part of our DNA here. And that’s hard to replicate in other communities.”

Some works on display at an exhibition of Kansas artists at the Hays Arts Council. Steve Hebert for The New York Times
The board president of the Arts Council, Mike Morley, 47, is a registered Republican who voted for Mr. Trump in November. Ms. Meder, 60, is a Democrat who voted for Hillary Clinton.

“On the political spectrum, we’re right to left and everything in between,” said Mr. Morley, who moved to Hays about five years ago and works in the utility industry. “But the one thing that we all have in common is an appreciation for the importance of the arts.”

Here in Ellis County, nearly 71 percent of voters favored Mr. Trump, part of his sweep of 103 of Kansas’s 105 counties. In interviews, some of those voters cited the president’s commitment to deregulation, their frustration with traditional politicians and concerns about government spending. But when it came to arts financing, the conversations were more nuanced among Trump voters. Some said they supported the proposed cuts, but others questioned whether eviscerating the endowment was the right approach.

Jacob Brubaker, a sophomore at Fort Hays State and a member of the College Republicans, said that the federal government should perhaps stop funding the arts eventually but that the drawdown should be gradual so that artists could find other money.

“The very last thing I want is to just eliminate these artistic opportunities for people at the high school and college level,” said Mr. Brubaker, a Trump voter who participated in school musicals while growing up on a farm outside Bird City, Kan., and who has attended performances during college. “Art just says so much about the culture of a county, a state, a country,” he added.

Dennis Schiel, an artist here who has paintings displayed in the Kansas Capitol and on the side of a downtown Hays building, also voted for Mr. Trump. He suggested that the endowment should be focused more on arts education but said targeting the agency for elimination was misguided.

“There are other, larger avenues they should be going after first,” said Mr. Schiel, a registered Democrat.

Arts supporters in Hays have managed to preserve most programs since the loss of state funds, sometimes with a frugal twist. Ms. Meder started asking schools to chip in to finance the outside performers she brings to the area, and she asked some of those artists to accept less money for their work. At Fort Hays State, corporate sponsors helped sustain a popular performance series when grant money became scarcer.

That loss of arts funding in Kansas was part of Mr. Brownback’s conservative makeover of state government, which included huge tax cuts that have led to years of missed revenue forecasts and budget deficits. When Mr. Brownback vetoed a $689,000 arts budget in 2011 and state money for the arts dried up, so did matching funds from the endowment, and Kansas’s membership in its regional affiliate, the Mid-America Arts Alliance. Ms. Meder, who has led the Hays Arts Council for 26 years, said that she had not applied for funds directly from N.E.A. but that the council had often benefited from federal money that passed through regional and state agencies.

Kansas eventually created a new state arts commission that awards some grants, but funding has been inconsistent. The state received matching funds from the endowment for 2017 of $637,000, but Kansas artists remain ineligible for grants from the Mid-America Arts Alliance.

Janis Lee, a Democrat who spent years representing a rural district in the Kansas Senate, said that midsize cities and large metropolitan areas often had the means to offset the lack of public funds. But many tiny towns across Kansas had few other options to draw regional or national performers, she said, or even to offer art classes in schools.

“You have a wholesale, gradual diminishing of that kind of activity for your community,” Ms. Lee said.

And in places like Hays, where the arts have persisted, advocates are concerned that their very survival might unintentionally prove that public money was never needed in the first place. Ms. Meder called it “a catch-22.”

“There is that fear, because we are finding a way to make it work,” Ms. Meder said. “But believe me, we have had to make some significant compromises and still been affected in certain ways.”

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nNJGGN
EmailFacebook

THE ARTS | WHEN THEY MET
Wildly Close From the Start

By ISAAC OLIVER
Reese Witherspoon, left, and Laura Dern. Elizabeth Weinberg for The New York Times
A mutual friend introduced Reese Witherspoon and Laura Dern in front of a restaurant in the Brentwood Country Mart complex in Santa Monica, Calif. They were already aware of each other; it was 2011, and both were movie stars of many years. They had also each played antiheroines in back-to-back late-1990s Alexander Payne films to unforgettable effect: Ms. Dern as Ruth Stoops in “Citizen Ruth” and Ms. Witherspoon as Tracy Flick in “Election.” But it was merely a quick hello.

They reunited in 2014 to play mother and daughter in “Wild,” a film based on Cheryl Strayed’s memoir that garnered them both Oscar nominations. A friendship blossomed quickly — playing family, as luck would have it, made them so. They now star (and spar) as rival Monterey power mothers in the new HBO mini-series “Big Little Lies,” of which Ms. Witherspoon is also an executive producer.

Speaking by telephone and email, Ms. Witherspoon and Ms. Dern talked about their fast-tracked friendship, multiple collaborations and conversations with their mothers (Ms. Dern’s is the actress Diane Ladd). This conversation has been edited and condensed.

REESE WITHERSPOON I was with Howell outside a restaurant. Howell Caldwell’s our friend who’s a first assistant director, who’d worked with Laura, and he’s this big, funny guy from Texas, and he’s like: “You gotta meet Laura Dern. You’re gonna love her, you’re gonna love her mom.” Her mom is, like, the quintessential Southern mom, and I have a real Southern mother, too. He said, “You guys are gonna be best friends.” And I remember thinking: “Could I be best friends with her? I don’t know.”

LAURA DERN We’d both worked with Alexander Payne and I felt this real kinship and connection through that, and pined to know her because of Southern family and Southern mothers.

WITHERSPOON People who work with Alexander feel connected. [Why] do you think that is, Laura?

DERN There are certain qualities that connect us in his mind. “You guys should know each other because you’re both physical comedians” — that’s one thing he said about us.

WITHERSPOON I see a lot of similarity in the way that you and I work, with humor but also this understanding of conscious people acting unconsciously. The reason I did “Election” was because of “Citizen Ruth.”

DERN There couldn’t be two more hateful characters in Alexander’s movies than ours. It was really fun to be silently bonded by having to play these sort-of awful people in the most delicious way.

WITHERSPOON On “Wild,” we didn’t get any rehearsal time. We immediately started, Day 1, with an incredibly emotional scene, and we just started laughing because it was so absurd to meet in this —

DERN Was it in the car?

WITHERSPOON No, you were in the bed in the hospital dying.

DERN Right! I was lying there trying to be dead, and she was so pure and so raw and exposed that I was trying not to weep, and then I started to laugh.

WITHERSPOON Nobody makes me laugh harder than Laura. She can put me on the floor with a text message.

DERN And always about the darkest things.

WITHERSPOON The darkest!

DERN We were also in this story of grief and true love and the mother-daughter relationship, which Reese and I both have with our mothers —

WITHERSPOON Right.

DERN — and all of that invited our friendship instantly. We just dove in. Reese was working every second. I’d come to set and want to say “Hi” and they’d say, “Well, she’s hanging off the side of a cliff right now.”

WITHERSPOON The day you had to come and I was doing a sex scene in an alley? All the sexuality was tied in with my [character’s] mother’s death, so there were all these times when Laura had to witness me having sex with men in an alley, or in a hospital bathroom.

DERN Like an inch from my face.

WITHERSPOON On the press tour [in Portland, Ore.], we ate a ton of food at Tasty n Alder and, after a few glasses of wine, ran around Powell’s Books creating an impromptu traveling book club. Then we went to Voodoo Doughnut and ate “Wild”-themed doughnuts the owners created for our premiere. We were together all over the world for five months. She taught me to love Red Vines. She taught me about brown lipstick.

DERN You know someone is your favorite person when you’ve done a day of press, listened to yourself ad nauseam, listened to them tell every story, and when it ends, it’s like, “Are we going to eat something?”

WITHERSPOON “What are we doing now?”

DERN “Why don’t we drive there together?”

WITHERSPOON “Why don’t we just share one room?”

DERN And after playing out, you know, a true love story between this mother and daughter, to hate each other [in “Big Little Lies”] is just hysterical.

WITHERSPOON My mother called me the other day — Laura, I didn’t tell you this — [she] was like: “I don’t like that show. I just don’t like it.” She’s like: “You’re too mean. It just bothers me how mean you are.”

DERN My mother called me — and she’s an actress — and goes, “You didn’t prepare me for what a bitch you are.” I’m like, “I didn’t know I was supposed to prepare you for any character I play!” And she said, “Yeah, but you’re a bitch to Reese.”

WITHERSPOON Your next article should be about how our mothers met. They watched “Wild” together in a theater holding hands.

DERN We love each other’s families. I was just in London and my son sprained his ankle and Reese texted me: Did I need anything? Or, when Reese was away, I got to have dinner with her daughter.

WITHERSPOON On Mother’s Day we were with our mothers and our kids, and her mother was telling us stories about old Hollywood. Our daughters go out to lunch and dinner and talk, even though they’re just teenagers. It’s nice for them to have a place to talk about their shared experiences as children of actresses, children in show business.

DERN When I met Reese, I knew she would be my family for the rest of my life. And I don’t say that lightly.

WITHERSPOON Now every time Laura’s on a movie that I’m not in, I’m jealous. I’m having FOMO [fear of missing out]. How dare she do “Star Wars” without me?

DERN I get so upset. My daughter said to me the other day, “I saw the funniest picture of Reese with Mindy Kaling, it was so cute.” I was like [sobbing sound]. It’s like middle school.

WITHERSPOON She’s going to piss me off at some point, though.

DERN And when I do, I expect that we’ll go to therapy for it.

WITHERSPOON And by therapy you mean a bar, right?

DERN Exactly.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nKM5lq
EmailFacebook

THE ARTS
The Harpsichordist With a Chip on His Keyboard

By JAMES R. OESTREICH
The harpsichordist Mahan Esfahani performing at the 92nd Street Y on Tuesday evening. Hiroyuki Ito for The New York Times
Attitude may not be the trait you most expect to find in a harpsichordist. Yet the Iranian-born Mahan Esfahani, 32, often seems to be spoiling for a fight.

He routinely challenges audiences with, say, half a program of more or less contemporary music, as he did in the small Buttenwieser Hall at the 92nd Street Y on Tuesday night. At every opportunity he bashes what he calls, in a program note, “the self-segregated realm of early music.” And whatever uproar may ensue, Mr. Esfahani will probably not shy away.

Before the final work on his program — a transcription of Steve Reich’s “Piano Phase,” of 1968, with Mr. Esfahani playing against his own recorded track of the first keyboard part — he spoke of an earlier performance at which “a lot of people made clear that they didn’t like it.” That was in Cologne, Germany, in February 2016, when a staid Sunday afternoon audience turned raucous, with some listeners shouting and stomping out in protest, and others clamoring for Mr. Esfahani’s right to be heard.

“I’ve dined out on that for the last year or so,” he told his listeners at the Y. And the tale, of course, inoculates him against loud mutterings from other audiences, who do not wish to be compared to the benighted Germans.

The only shouts here were occasional encouraging yelps, as Mr. Esfahani made his way from a conventionally antiquarian opening, with Thomas Tomkins’s Pavan in A and Giles Farnaby’s “Woody-Cock,” through a somewhat conservative modern coupling — Henry Cowell’s “Set of Four” (1960) and Viktor Kalabis’s “Three Aquarelles” (1979) — and back to Bach’s magisterial Toccata in C minor (BWV 911).

Speaking before the Bach, Mr. Esfahani again threw jabs at the early-music crowd, dissing authenticity and historicity. Noting that he plays Bach differently in the company of works by living composers, he said, “I give you completely inauthentic Bach, but Bach which is authentic to me.”

Here he protested perhaps too much. Though his Bach was indeed notable, and captivating, for the liberties it took with pacing and expression, it was hardly out of line with current experimentation by inbred early-musickers. Still, the attitude, as it came across here, was most refreshing.

And so, on to Mr. Reich’s “Piano Phase”: It was easy to imagine how the insistent jangling repetition might grate on the ears of listeners not particularly attuned to the Minimalist idiom — or, for that matter, to the harpsichord. Though the audience seemed mostly game and initially enthralled, a certain restlessness became palpable in some quarters through the work’s 20 minutes or so.

Yet even the most disparaging listener could only have admired Mr. Esfahani’s discipline and close concentration as he moved out of phase with the taped performance in minuscule increments and then, ever so slowly, drifted back in. The ovation was intense and seemingly universal.

And Mr. Esfahani offered a further reward, utterly unproblematic and lovely: an encore of Rameau’s Gavotte With Variations in A minor.

Mahan Esfahani
92nd Street Y

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nCU2ci
EmailFacebook

THE ARTS
Jay Z Plans Projects About Trayvon Martin

By CHRISTOPHER D. SHEA
Trayvon Martin in 2009. He was killed by a neighborhood watch volunteer, George Zimmerman, in 2012. The Florida case helped fuel a national debate about racial profiling. Martin Family, via Associated Press
The rap star Jay Z and the Weinstein Company will team up to produce a series of television and film projects about the life of Trayvon Martin, the unarmed black teenager who was shot dead in 2012 near his home by a neighborhood watch volunteer, George Zimmerman.

The killing — and Mr. Zimmerman’s acquittal of second-degree murder and manslaughter charges in 2013 — set off large-scale protests in support of Mr. Martin around the United States, and helped fuel a national debate about racial profiling.

A spokeswoman for the Weinstein Company on Friday confirmed the news of the projects, which Variety originally reported.

The projects are based on two books to which producers have acquired rights: “Suspicion Nation: The Inside Story of the Trayvon Martin Injustice and Why We Continue to Repeat It,” a firsthand account by Lisa Bloom about covering the Zimmerman trial as an NBC analyst; and “Rest in Power: The Enduring Life of Trayvon Martin,” a biographical book about Mr. Martin written by his parents.

The projects include a six-part documentary series as well as a film, which are both inspired by elements from the books.

It’s not the first time that Mr. Martin’s story has been adapted: The director Nonny de la Peña used court records and 911 calls to create “One Dark Night,” a virtual reality film about the shooting.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mZ3iDm
EmailFacebook

THE ARTS
Nobel Laureate Writes Trump-Inspired Play

By JOSHUA BARONE
The Nobel laureate Elfriede Jelinek at her home in Vienna, in 2004. Leonhard Foeger/Reuters
“On the Royal Road: The Burgher King,” a new play about President Trump written by the Nobel laureate Elfriede Jelinek, will have its first presentation next week in the United States.

Excerpts from the play — which is scheduled to have its premiere this fall at the Deutsches Schauspielhaus in Hamburg, Germany — will be read on Monday at the Martin E. Segal Theater Center at the CUNY Graduate Center.

Ms. Jelinek, an Austrian who was awarded the Nobel Prize in literature in 2004, is best known among American audiences as the author of the 1983 novel “The Piano Teacher,” which inspired the 2001 Michael Haneke film of the same title.

“She’s a very ferocious writer for the theater,” Frank Hentschker, the theater center’s executive director, said, and added that her recent plays had reckoned with current events: “Die Schutzbefohlenen” (2013), about the migrant crisis; “Wut” (2016), about the 2015 Charlie Hebdo massacre in Paris; and now this new work inspired by Mr. Trump.

The play’s subtitle — “The Burgher King” — is a play on the German word “Bürger” (“Citizens”), and is also a more literal reference to hamburgers and meat, Mr. Hentschker said. “It will be an attack on the Trump aesthetic: the gold, the plush furniture,” he added.

Gitta Honegger, Ms. Jelinek’s translator, described the play as being told by a blind female seer who “suggests Miss Piggy channeling a confused Tiresias as she tries to get a handle on the bizarre behavior of the leader-elect to draw from it some sort of oracle for the future.”

“This seer with bleeding eyes sends Trump through a shattered looking glass where Jelinek examines him through the distorted mirrors of the heroes of Western culture: from Oedipus to Abraham, Isaac and Jesus, to Martin Heidegger, who attempted to lead the Führer,” Ms. Honegger wrote.

Mr. Trump has quickly (and not unsurprisingly) influenced American dramatists. His candidacy inspired a new adaptation of Sinclair Lewis’s novel “It Can’t Happen Here” last fall at Berkeley Repertory Theater. And Robert Schenkkan, author of the Lyndon B. Johnson-themed “All the Way,” wrote “Building the Wall” in the immediate aftermath of the election.

Follow Joshua Barone on Twitter: @joshbarone.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nNio2Z
EmailFacebook

THE ARTS
Africa Center Lifts Fund-Raising Goals

By COLIN MOYNIHAN
The building that houses the Africa Center, in Harlem, has been completed for several years, but the center has faced financing obstacles. Sam Hodgson for The New York Times
The building that houses the Africa Center, a Harlem institution devoted to African art and policy, has been completed for several years now. But fund-raising obstacles have prevented the center’s space itself from opening.

Recently, though, the center posted a computer simulation on its website that provides a glimpse of what its headquarters may eventually look like. And it has announced efforts that will be made by its new board president, Halima Aliko Dangote, to close the funding gap.

The simulation shows how the center, built as part of a luxury condo development at the corner of Fifth Avenue and 110th Street, is expected to be transformed into an elegant white-walled space. According to the video, there will be a public atrium on the ground floor, galleries and a theater on the second floor and offices and meeting rooms on the third floor as well as a terrace with views of Central Park.

Originally known as the Museum for African Art, the organization renamed itself the Africa Center several years ago, with a broader mission that includes economic and public-policy programming.

Ms. Dangote, who was recently appointed president of the center’s board and head of the capital campaign, narrates a portion of the video. She is the daughter of Aliko Dangote, a Nigerian cement magnate and billionaire who has been identified by Forbes magazine as the richest man in Africa.

Africa Center officials in New York did not immediately respond on Friday to questions about how much money was needed to complete the space and whether there was a time frame for its opening. But during a recent fund-raising event in Nigeria, Ms. Dangote told CNBC Africa that she hoped to raise $4 million to $5 million that night and that she planned similar events in Morocco and Kenya.


Correction: March 25, 2017

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misstated the relationship of Halima Aliko Dangote, the president of the board of the Africa Center, to the cement magnate Aliko Dangote. She is his daughter, not his wife. The article also misstated the amount that Ms. Dangote told CNBC Africa she hoped to collect for the center at a recent fund-raising event. It was $4 million to $5 million, not $45 million.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nNfDic
EmailFacebook

THE ARTS
Pursued by His Own Demons

By LAURA COLLINS-HUGHES
Obi Abili in the title role of “The Emperor Jones,” at Irish Repertory Theater. Ian Douglas for The New York Times
The unbounded fury of Emperor Brutus Jones blasts into the room before he does. It is the sound of a powerful man in a dangerous fit of temper. “Who dare wake up the emperor?” he roars.

That would be the director Ciaran O’Reilly, who has revived his gorgeous, astonishing production of Eugene O’Neill’s “The Emperor Jones” at Irish Repertory Theater, with largely the same creative team but an almost entirely new cast. Revelatory in 2009, when it starred the commanding John Douglas Thompson, it’s now both ferocious and blindsidingly affecting with the British newcomer Obi Abili in the title role.

The play, from 1920, unfolds into a fractured dark night of the American soul, but it begins in daylight in the palace of the West Indies island that Jones rules. A black American with a murderous past and an avaricious present, he’s a former Pullman porter. Reckless and mercurial, a bully when he wants to feel his own strength, he luxuriates in the perks of the office he’s grabbed for himself: the throne, the golden crown, the money he is milking from it.

“Ain’t I the emperor?” he says. “The laws don’t go for him.”

Maybe not, but the islanders he hoodwinked into his thrall have already begun their revolt. Soon Jones tries to flee through the forest, his only weapon a gun with five lead bullets and one silver — that last for killing himself, should the need arise.

As the Wooster Group’s infamous blackface interpretation made indelibly clear, originally in the 1990s, “The Emperor Jones” is encrusted by its own time, with dialect that reads like racial caricature and sometimes cringe-worthy stage directions. “His features are typically Negroid, yet there is something decidedly distinctive about his face,” O’Neill wrote, introducing Jones.

Mr. O’Reilly’s lucid fever dream of a production shrugs off that grime, putting at its center a performance of such assured intelligence that there’s no possibility of condescension. Boundary-pushing in its day, the play still has plenty to say — about tyranny and greed and corruption, sure, but more potently about our culture’s long history of race-based violence and degradation. Jones doesn’t believe in ghosts, but the fearful past haunts him anyway through his night of terror in the woods.

Those woods are strangely ravishing, like some piece of ensorcellment out of a live-action “The Wizard of Oz.” Inside dark, textured costumes (by Antonia Ford-Roberts and Whitney Locher), actors playing the trees dance to an eerie soundscape, discombobulating the fallen emperor. (The choreography is by Barry McNabb, the sound design by Ryan Rumery and M. Florian Staab.)

Visions appear, surreal and disturbing: giant, sluglike creatures; a dice-playing porter Jones killed; a chain gang from his imprisonment — all puppets (by Bob Flanagan) with an unearthly air. Jones spends bullets to make them disappear. Then another figment comes: a slave auction with Jones on the block, Southern belles fanning themselves in the crowd.

His cockiness has evaporated by then, replaced by a tearful despair that has sent him to his knees before God, confessing his sins with an anguish that is absolutely flaying.

Think you couldn’t weep for Brutus Jones? Mr. Abili will make you think again.

The Emperor Jones
Through April 23 at Irish Repertory Theater, Manhattan; 212-727-2737, irishrep.org. Running time: 70 minutes.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mZEefo
EmailFacebook

THE ARTS
Enemy Within

By NEIL GENZLINGER
All the noise about immigration and travel restrictions is missing the point. Terror by radicalized Muslims isn’t going to be stopped unless someone unplugs the internet.

That’s one of the conclusions reached by “American Jihad,” a timely documentary Saturday night on Showtime. Its second point, though, is more practical, if underdeveloped. The problem, the film suggests, is still small enough that one-to-one interventions are the best way to address it.

The film, by Alison Ellwood (a frequent collaborator of the super-documentarian Alex Gibney), examines several of the relatively few instances of jihad-inspired terrorism in the United States, noting that the attackers found their inspiration on computer screens.

“In Europe, you have face-to-face recruitment,” says Ali Soufan, a former special agent for the F.B.I. “In the United States, the situation is a little bit different. The threat has mostly been through the internet, through social media.”

The film also notes that radicalization that leads to violence isn’t new; there have always been disaffected people, many of them young.

“Thirty, 40 years ago, these were kids who may have been looking toward far-left or anarchist ideologies, or Communism,” notes Alexander Meleagrou-Hitchens, research director for a program on extremism at George Washington University.

The experts here do no better than any others at pinpointing what leads to radicalization, beyond the usual vague assertions about a search for identity and sense of belonging. The film’s most heart-rending interviews are with parents of people who turned to terrorism; they’re still struggling to figure out what went wrong.

The testimonies and case studies build effectively to President Trump’s travel and immigration policies, which seem less helpful than ever after the evidence presented. The film would be better if it teased out its ideas about personal interventions and how mainstream Muslims might be brought into such an approach, but it’s still full of food for thought served at just the right moment.

American Jihad
Saturday on Showtime

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nNc0Jh
EmailFacebook

THE ARTS
Jane Austen Has Alt-Right Fans? Heavens to Darcy!

By JENNIFER SCHUESSLER
Jane Austen Hulton Archive, via Getty Images
It’s a truth universally acknowledged that anyone in want of attention could do worse than take possession of Jane Austen.

We’ve already had Austen and zombies, Austen and game theory, Austen and guinea pigs.

Now, a scholar has offered another spit-take-inducing pairing: Jane Austen and the alt-right.

No, bonnet-wearing Janeites have not been spotted at white nationalist gatherings. But in an article published March 12 in The Chronicle of Higher Education titled “Alt-Right Jane Austen” (and illustrated with a drawing of the beloved British novelist in a Make America Great Again hat), Nicole M. Wright, an assistant professor of English at the University of Colorado, describes finding a surprising Austen fan base.

It started, she writes, when she noticed the provocateur Milo Yiannopoulos riffing on the famous first line of “Pride and Prejudice,” turning it into a dig at “ugly” feminists. (He also mistakenly called Austen, who died during the reign of George III, a “Victorian” novelist, but whatever.)

Looking around, Ms. Wright also found more straight-faced references to Austen in alt-right paeans to racial purity and subservient wives, including a shout-out from a blogger promoting the infamous meme of Taylor Swift as an “Aryan goddess.”

Some alt-right admirers hail Austen’s novels as blueprints for a white nationalist “ethno-state.” Others cite her as a rare example of female greatness. But the bigger point, Ms. Wright argues, is the same.

“By comparing their movement not to the nightmare Germany of Hitler and Goebbels, but instead to the cozy England of Austen,” she writes, alt-right Austen fans “nudge readers” into thinking that “perhaps white supremacists aren’t so different from mainstream folks.”

Ms. Wright’s article went viral, drawing attention everywhere from European news outlets to Redneck Revolt, an American website that describes itself as opposing both white supremacy and the condescension of “upper class urban liberals.”

The white nationalist Richard Spencer tweeted about the article. But many Janeites responded to the notion of an alt-right Austen as if they had been personally trolled.

“No one who reads Jane Austen’s words with any attention and reflection can possibly be alt-right,” Elaine Bander, a retired professor and a former officer of the Jane Austen Society of North America, said in an email.

“All the Janeites I know,” she added, “are rational, compassionate, liberal-minded people.”

Juliette Wells, an associate professor of English at Goucher College and the author of the forthcoming book “Reading Austen in America,” also rejected any alt-right interpretation of Austen. But she said she was unsurprised by Ms. Wright’s article, given that Austen’s name has “long circulated on the far right,” and just about everywhere else.

“Of course the one female author who has name recognition on par with Shakespeare is the one who gets dragged into debates like this,” Ms. Wells said. “It’s the flip side of her enormous international fame.”

Austen’s connections with grubby contemporary politics are often played for pure laughs. In 2000, the online magazine Slate used the headline “Bin Laden a Huge Jane Austen Fan” to tease a column that had pretty much nothing to do with either.

The Austen scholar Mary Ann O’Farrell, in a 2012 paper, cited that headline as just one of many “ugly couplings” involving Austen, which are based on the idea that she is a safe, apolitical, “ladylike” author removed from the rough and tumble of politics.

But in fact, Austen has a long history of being cited in political debates, sometimes on opposite sides of a question.

In the forthcoming book “The Making of Jane Austen,” Devoney Looser, a professor at Arizona State University, describes the passionate debate in the British Parliament over an 1872 proposal to give the vote to widows and unmarried women with property.

A conservative quoted a line from Austen supposedly suggesting that she, like all proper British women, would be appalled by the proposal. Liberals countered that she was precisely the sort of intelligent, independent woman who was demanding the vote.

Speaking in an interview, Ms. Looser — who, incidentally, skates in roller derby under the name Stone Cold Jane Austen — said Austen’s name also appeared on a banner carried by British suffragists at a march in 1908, even as her reputation was widely discussed in upper-class London men’s clubs.

The question then? Not whether it was acceptable for men to like Austen — who was seen at the time as a “manly” author — but whether it was acceptable to not like her.

“When one man suggested she wasn’t that great,” Ms. Looser said, “he got angry reactions.”

Contemporary scholars have also made opposing political arguments about Austen. In the 1993 book “Culture and Imperialism,” the Palestinian-American literary critic Edward W. Said argued that Austen’s novel “Mansfield Park” glorifies the grand estates of England but is silent about the West Indian slave plantations that supported many of them.

But last year, in “Jane Austen, the Secret Radical,” the British scholar Helena Kelly argued that the novel was larded with subtle references to abolition and the Church of England’s complicity in slavery that no reader of Austen’s time would have missed.

But this kind of scholarly research does not necessarily trickle out to the broader Jane-loving public, who may have a much more straightforward reading of her marital happy endings.

Tracey Hutchings-Goetz, a graduate student in English at Indiana University, recalled working with a group of feminist literary scholars last summer to revise the Wikipedia page for Austen’s novel “Pride and Prejudice.” She was startled to see it described as a celebration of traditional marriage, a notion supported by multiple citations to an essay from the magazine Crisis, a neoconservative Catholic publication.

“It was a version of the novel that didn’t make any sense to us as scholars, supported by a completely unscholarly source,” Ms. Hutchings-Goetz said.

Meanwhile, the Austen-related posts that Ms. Wright found on alt-right sites link marital traditionalism to outright racism.

A post on the website Counter Currents called “The Woman Question in White Nationalism,” for example, includes a string of comments debating how the vision of marriage in Austen’s “Pride and Prejudice” fit with the “racial dictatorship” necessary to preserve western civilization.

“If traditional marriage à la P&P is going to be imposed, again, in an ethnostate, we must behave like gentlemen,” one commenter wrote.

In recent years, scholars have tried to find diversity in the seemingly all-white world of Austen, digging into subjects like Miss Lambe, a character in her unfinished final novel, “Sanditon,” described as a “half mulatto” heiress from the West Indies. (Yes, there is a scholarly paper with the title “The Silence of Miss Lambe.”)

But Ms. Wells said scholars teaching Austen at schools with “substantially multicultural students” still wrestled with a truth that must, perhaps, be uncomfortably acknowledged.

“Her characters are white, and her world is white,” she said. “What do you do with that?”

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mHYd28
EmailFacebook

THE ARTS
What’s on Saturday

By KATHRYN SHATTUCK
Adam Driver and Golshifteh Farahani in “Paterson.” Mary Cybulski
Adam Driver gets behind the wheel — and turns his musings into poetry — in Jim Jarmusch’s “Paterson.” And an expectant mother goes on a killing rampage guided by her fetus in “Prevenge.”

What’s Streaming

PATERSON (2016) on iTunes and Amazon. Adam Driver is Paterson, a bus driver in Paterson, N.J., who composes poetry in his head while guiding his coach through that mill town’s congested streets. There are two central characters — Golshifteh Farahani plays Laura, Paterson’s eccentric wife and muse — in Jim Jarmusch’s meditation on poetry both on the page and in life. Three, if you count Marvin (Nellie), their English bulldog. Divided into the days of a week as Paterson goes about his routine — rising, driving, walking the dog, writing in his notebook — the film progresses “from the basic to the rhapsodic, the material to the transcendent,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “But Mr. Jarmusch doesn’t turn problems into drama. Life is enough,” she continued. “Instead, with visual precision and emotional restraint — and aided by Mr. Driver’s tamped-down, sober and gently endearing performance — Mr. Jarmusch creates that rarest portrait of the artist: the one who’s happy being hard at work.”

PREVENGE (2017) on Shudder. A desperately lonely mother-to-be (Alice Lowe, who also wrote and directed this bit of scariness while pregnant) goes on a murderous spree orchestrated by her devious fetus. Writing in The Times, Jeannette Catsoulis called it “a brilliantly conceived meditation on prepartum anxiety and extreme grief” with “a deeply conflicted avenger” at its heart. “You’ll laugh, you’ll squirm, you’ll want to get sterilized immediately.”

What’s on TV

INDEPENDENCE DAY: RESURGENCE (2016) 8 p.m. on HBO. Twenty years after Roland Emmerich’s quip-rich blockbuster about an extraterrestrial invasion, the aliens are back, and so are some familiar faces: Bill Pullman as former President Thomas J. Whitmore; Jeff Goldblum as David Levinson, now the president of Earth Space Defense for the United Nations; Judd Hirsch as his chess-loving father, Julius; and Brent Spiner as Dr. Brackish Okun, the scientist formerly in charge of research at Area 51. “All deliver professional, winking performances, but they’re also stranded in an overly crowded cast that gives too much time to younger performers” — that would include Liam Hemsworth, as the new flyboy in town — “who, for the most part, slide right off the screen,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times.

PLANET EARTH II 9 p.m. on BBC America. The series ends its journey in the newest habitat on earth — cities — to reveal how London foxes, Los Angeles crows, Mumbai leopards and Jodhpur monkeys survive in a manufactured world.

AMERICAN JIHAD (2017) 9 p.m. on Showtime. Using the recruiting tactics of Anwar al-Awlaki — the first American-born terrorist to be killed by a United States drone strike abroad — as a stepping-off point, Alison Ellwood explores how young men are being radicalized to commit terrorism.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nOY4OT
EmailFacebook

NEXT SECTION: BUSINESS DAY

PREVIOUS SECTION: THE ARTS
BUSINESS DAY
California Upholds Emissions Standards

By HIROKO TABUCHI

Traffic in Los Angeles in December. California is authorized to enact its own stricter emissions rules under a Clean Air Act waiver. Andrew Cullen for The New York Times
California’s clean-air agency voted on Friday to push ahead with stricter emissions standards for cars and trucks, setting up a potential legal battle with the Trump administration over the state’s plan to reduce planet-warming gases.

The vote, by the California Air Resources Board, is the boldest indication yet of California’s plan to stand up to President Trump’s agenda. Leading politicians in the state, from the governor down to many mayors, have promised to lead the resistance to Mr. Trump’s policies.

Mr. Trump, backing industry over environmental concerns, said easing emissions rules would help stimulate auto manufacturing. He vowed last week to loosen the regulations. Automakers are aggressively pursuing those changes after years of supporting stricter standards.

But California can write its own standards because of a longstanding waiver granted under the Clean Air Act, giving the state — the country’s biggest auto market — major sway over the auto industry. Twelve other states, including New York and Pennsylvania, as well as Washington, D.C., follow California’s standards, a coalition that covers more than 130 million residents and more than a third of the vehicle market in the United States.

“All of the evidence — call it science, call it economics — shows that if anything, these standards should be even more aggressive,” said the board member Daniel Sperling, a transportation expert at the University of California, Davis.

The board’s chairwoman, Mary D. Nichols, an assistant administrator at the Environmental Protection Agency under President Bill Clinton, was even more pointed, admonishing automakers for milking Mr. Trump for favors.

“What were you thinking when you threw yourselves upon the mercy of the Trump administration to try to solve your problems?” she asked. “Let’s take action today, and let’s move on.”

Long a forerunner in environmental regulation, California worked with the Obama administration on joint standards that became a crucial part of the country’s effort to combat climate change. Officials said the regulations would reduce the country’s oil consumption by 12 billion barrels and eliminate six billion metric tons of carbon dioxide pollution over the lifetime of the cars affected. That amounts to more than a year’s worth of America’s carbon emissions.

Adopted in 2012, the standards would require automakers to nearly double the average fuel economy of new cars and trucks by 2025, to 54.5 miles per gallon, forcing automakers to speed development of highly fuel-efficient vehicles, including hybrid and electric cars. Mr. Trump intends to lower that target.

Friday’s unanimous vote by the 14-member board, which affirmed the higher standards through 2025, amounted to a public rejection of Mr. Trump’s plans.

Now, the question is how — or whether — the Trump administration will handle California’s dissent. The administration could choose to revoke California’s waiver, at which point experts expect the state would sue.

California sued the George W. Bush administration after it challenged California’s waiver in 2007. Mr. Obama reversed the federal challenge.

The White House and the E.P.A., which have not yet determined their plans for the California waiver, did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Several states that follow California’s rules raced to its defense. “We’ve come a long way together,” said Steven Flint, director of the air resources division of the New York Department of Environmental Conservation. “We’re with you, and we believe in what you’re doing.”

Environmentalists and public health experts have criticized the automakers’ resistance to emissions rules under the Trump administration as an about-face. All major automakers previously voiced support for the more stringent standards.

After the election of Mr. Trump, a group representing the nation’s biggest makers of cars and light trucks urged a reassessment of the emissions rules, which the group said posed a “substantial challenge” for the auto industry.

Automakers now complain about the steep technical challenge that the stringent standards pose. They have estimated that only about 3.5 percent of new vehicles are able to reach it, and that their industry would have to spend a “staggering” $200 billion by 2025 to comply.

A separate study by the International Council on Clean Transportation, a think tank supporting emissions controls, has estimated that the cost of meeting those standards could be overstated by as much as 40 percent. And auto industry experts have warned that a slowdown in America’s shift toward efficient cars could leave its auto market a global laggard.

John Bozzella, chief executive of Global Automakers, an industry trade group, said before the California vote that companies agreed on the need to continue to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and improve fuel economy. But he urged California to fall into line with federal rules.

“There is a more effective way forward than regulatory systems that are different,” Mr. Bozzella said. He also suggested that demand for clean cars remained relatively tiny.

What was required, he said, were standards that “balance innovation, compliance and consumer needs and wants.”

Automakers have also been critical of a California’s zero-emission vehicle program, which requires automakers to sell a certain percentage of electric cars and trucks in California and nine other states. The board voted on Friday to continue that program.

Politicians in California, one of the country’s most Democratic states, have embraced acting as a bulwark against Mr. Trump’s policies, promising to defend the state’s laws on immigration, health care and the environment. Many cities in California have broad “sanctuary” policies aimed at protecting the rights of undocumented immigrants. State law also provides some protections for immigrants from being turned over to federal authorities for deportation.

In addition, Gov. Jerry Brown, a Democrat, declared that California would continue to work toward its legally required target of reducing carbon emissions to 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2030. And the state has retained Eric H. Holder Jr., the former United States attorney general, to advise on potential legal fights with the White House.

Even at the federal level, the president’s announcement alone will not be enough to immediately roll back emissions standards, a process expected to take more than a year of legal and regulatory reviews by the E.P.A. and the Transportation Department. The Trump administration would then need to propose its own replacement fuel-economy standards.

Still, the Trump administration’s move to ease emissions rules is the first part of an expected assault on Mr. Obama’s environmental legacy. In the coming weeks, Mr. Trump is also expected to announce that he will direct the E.P.A. to dismantle Obama-era regulations on pollution from coal-fired power plants.

The E.P.A. administrator, Scott Pruitt, has said he does not think carbon dioxide is a primary cause of global warming, a statement at odds with the scientific consensus on climate change.

Bonnie Holmes-Gen of the American Lung Association of California, one of many health and environmental groups that spoke at the board meeting, said moving away from strict emissions standards would hurt public health and the health of the planet. She urged the state to stay its course.

“The public is bearing a huge cost — billions of dollars in health expenses and damage from climate,” Ms. Holmes-Gen said. “I urge California to keep us on track.”


Correction: March 25, 2017

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misstated Steven Flint’s position. He is director of the air resources division of the New York Department of Environmental Conservation, not the director of the department.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nNHmPY
EmailFacebook

BUSINESS DAY
Paradise? ‘I Want a Refund’

By NEIL GOUGH and CAO LI
A model of the Forest City development is displayed at the Country Garden property showroom in Johor Bahru, Malaysia. Ore Huiying/Bloomberg
HONG KONG — China’s intensifying efforts to keep money from leaving the country have cast doubt over big Hollywood deals and other marquee investments.

Now, they are blocking Kitty Zhu from buying her dream home.

The 39-year-old Ms. Zhu, who runs a cosmetic center in the southern Chinese city of Zhuhai, is one of hundreds of Chinese investors who have bet money on an ambitious but troubled residential project in Malaysia. More than 1,200 miles from China, the $40 billion Forest City housing complex — when completed — will combine lushly green beachfront property with amenities for children and the elderly alike, according to its developer.

But while the developer is Chinese, the payments must be made in Malaysia. Ms. Zhu and other buyers now say they have run into problems making payments on their Forest City apartments.

“I‘ve lost confidence in this project and I don’t want to pay any more,” said Ms. Zhu, who has already paid nearly $44,000 of the $334,000 purchase price. “I told my salesman that I want a refund, but he just avoids me.”

A model condominium unit at Country Gardens’ Forest City showroom in Johor Bahru last month. Edgar Su/Reuters
Chinese officials are scrambling to keep money in its borders, and the efforts are hitting big companies and people like Ms. Zhu alike. China spent $1 trillion shoring up its currency since 2014 as big companies and regular investors shifted their money out of the country over worries about slowing economic growth and the prospect of better returns elsewhere. In response, China has put new limits on the ways Chinese can invest and use their credit cards abroad.

The limits now appear to be hitting Chinese efforts to buy real estate globally. In December, China’s currency foreign-exchange regulator said it would take a harder look at how some were buying property, among other investments. On Friday, the overseas arm of UnionPay, the state-owned firm that dominates bank card payment processing in China, said it would prohibit the use of its cards for cross-border property acquisitions.

The moves could hit a large group: The Chinese invested $33 billion in overseas commercial and residential property deals last year, according to Jones Lang LaSalle, a real estate services firm. Building homes in overseas markets like Hong Kong, Malaysia, Australia or New York City and marketing them to investment-minded buyers back home has become a cottage industry for China’s larger property developers, who also promote the strategy as a way to help export China’s industrial overcapacity.

“It is a major problem for some developers that have megaprojects overseas, as it appears they sell, and were intended to sell, mainly to Chinese investors rather than local buyers,” said Nigel Stevenson, an analyst at GMT Research in Hong Kong. “Anecdotally it does seem much harder for Chinese buyers to transfer money offshore to pay for properties,” he added.

Country Garden, the Chinese developer building Forest City in Malaysia, has also been affected. In a Chinese-language statement sent this month to the Reuters news agency and reviewed by The New York Times, Country Garden said it decided to temporarily close its international property sales centers in mainland China for repositioning and upgrading “in order to better meet the existing foreign exchange policies and regulations.”

Construction continues next to villa showrooms at the Country Gardens’ Forest City project. Edgar Su/Reuters
A Country Garden spokeswoman said the closure of the sales centers was “not a knee-jerk reaction” to the policy and reflected a shift to selling internationally. Speaking to reporters in Hong Kong on Wednesday, Yeung Kwok-keung, the chairman and founder of Country Garden, skirted the question and struck the same point.

”This project is for sale to the entire world,” Mr. Yeung said.

Forest City bills itself as “a dream paradise for all mankind.” A promotional video for the project highlights a special duty-free shopping zone and its proximity to Singapore, and includes video of tropical fish and sea turtles swimming in turquoise waters.

It is also surrounded by freighters. Just to the west of Forest City is Malaysia’s Tanjung Pelepas container port, which is busier than the ports of Los Angeles or New York. Across the water in Singapore lies an industrial district.

The four artificial islands of the Forest City site cover nearly eight square miles. Recent drone video shows a handful of apartment towers under construction, while completed buildings include the spaceshiplike sales showroom and a hotel.

Videos show beaches sprinkled with white sand covering the newly reclaimed shorelines. In front of the showroom, dozens of life-size sculptures of seals perch incongruously in the equatorial heat.

For some, buyer’s remorse has set in. On online forums in China, a number of Forest City home buyers said they suddenly found making their payment difficult.

Last year, Rafael Liu and his father were in the showroom of a Country Garden development in China’s eastern Jiangsu province when they learned about the Forest City project in Malaysia.

“We felt that it could be a place for my father to go in the winter,” said Mr. Liu, a 27-year-old banker from Nanjing. His father went on a buying tour last year to Malaysia and liked what he saw. When he came back to China, father and son went to a Country Garden sales office and paid more than 30 percent down on an apartment costing over $130,000.

Since then they have been transferring payments once every three months to a bank account in the southern city of Foshan, where Country Garden is based. But recently, the developer told Mr. Liu he could not make payments in China any more, and instead gave him details for accounts in Malaysia or Hong Kong to use. Mr. Liu balked, worried about violating China’s restrictions on foreign currency transactions.

“I am not paying any more,” he said.

But now he and his father are in limbo. They do not want to forfeit the 30 percent penalty for a refund. And pursuing arbitration could also result in steep legal fees.

Like many other Chinese developers, Country Garden has borrowed money from overseas, which could leave it vulnerable to any weakening in the Chinese currency and to higher interest rates in the United States. For companies, a weaker currency makes paying back debt more expensive. More than half of Country Garden’s $12.8 billion in debt is denominated in American or Hong Kong dollars, though the company said on Wednesday that its overall cost of borrowing had declined.

In domestic Malaysian politics, Forest City has also become something of a political lightning rod.

The country’s former prime minister, Mahathir Mohamad, has taken to his blog repeatedly to criticize the project — and the administration of current Prime Minister Najib Razak — for allegedly selling land, residency and other benefits to relatively affluent mainland Chinese and bringing little economic benefit to locals in return. Mr. Najib has rejected these criticisms, saying Malaysia is merely taking a page from Dubai’s playbook by building giant projects to attract outside investors.

In a blog entry March 13, Mr. Mahathir said he recently visited Forest City for the first time.

He noted the impressive landscaping, including the large swimming pool and “beautiful” beach. But he renewed his criticism, saying the project is the equivalent of selling off land to foreigners.

“Indeed, Malaysia is very generous,” he wrote. “Anyone can stay here.”

Follow Neil Gough on Twitter: @n_gough

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mZutOh
EmailFacebook

BUSINESS DAY
Blackstone Frees Itself of SeaWorld by Selling Stake to Chinese Firm

By MICHAEL J. de la MERCED
SeaWorld in Orlando, Fla., last year. Blackstone took SeaWorld public in 2013, but the public offering was made in the aftermath of the searing documentary “Blackfish.” Edward Linsmier for The New York Times
Over seven years, the Blackstone Group nearly tripled its investment in SeaWorld, the home of Shamu and other killer whales.

But that home-run return came with a major headache: dealing with the repercussions of “Blackfish,” a searing documentary that castigated SeaWorld’s treatment of orca whales in captivity.

Now Blackstone is finally free of that burden. On Friday, the company sold its stake in SeaWorld to Zhonghong Group, a Chinese investment firm, for about $449 million. The deal will pave the way for SeaWorld to open parks in China.

The sale was a quiet end to an investment Blackstone had once been happy to promote. At onetime, the company let two SeaWorld penguins roam the halls of its stately Manhattan offices and shake appendages with its chief executive, Stephen A. Schwarzman.

But owning SeaWorld became a liability to its reputation after “Blackfish” debuted at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival. The film, which was eventually picked up by CNN, offered an indictment of SeaWorld’s care of Tilikum, an orca that became one of the park’s biggest stars, but that also was involved in the deaths of three people, including his trainer.

Outrage over the film metastasized quickly into calls to prohibit keeping killer whales in captivity. Firms like Southwest Airlines severed ties to SeaWorld. The controversy eventually depressed attendance at SeaWorld’s theme parks, leading to the ouster of its chief executive in 2015.

Since then, SeaWorld has stopped breeding whales and announced plans to phase out its famous orca shows in favor of attractions without live animals.

Nevertheless, SeaWorld proved a winner for Blackstone financially. The firm’s final return amounted to about $1.7 billion, or 2.7 times its original investment, according to a person briefed on the matter, who was not authorized to speak publicly. That figure includes all of the stock Blackstone sold and the dividends it collected from the company.

SeaWorld said that Blackstone sold its remaining 19.5 million shares to Zhonghong at $23 each, or 26 percent more than the closing price Thursday.

Blackstone declined to comment on the stake sale.

It gained control of SeaWorld in 2009 when it bought Anheuser-Busch InBev’s theme parks. That deal made Blackstone — which at the time owned Universal Studios Orlando and the Madame Tussauds wax museum franchise — the country’s second-biggest theme park operator, behind Disney.

The 2009 deal also gave Blackstone control of parks like Busch Gardens and Sesame Place. But it was SeaWorld and its killer-whale attractions in Florida, Texas and California that were clearly the crown jewels.

“We are delighted to be investing in a company with such iconic brands, irreplaceable assets and strong growth prospects,” Michael Chae, a senior Blackstone executive, said at the time.

For several years, business was good. Profits in 2012 were four times what they were the previous year. Blackstone took SeaWorld public in April of 2013, raising $702 million in the offering.

Then “Blackfish” hit.

SeaWorld shares have fallen nearly 46 percent since the initial offering. They closed up 4.7 percent Friday, at $18.13. Profits have fallen annually since 2012, leading to a $12.5 million loss last year.

Zhonghong is a conglomerate with holdings in real estate, leisure and tourism. Among its notable deals was its acquisition last year of the travel company Abercrombie & Kent.

“Zhonghong Group is making a significant, long-term investment in SeaWorld, reflecting their appreciation of the strength of our brand, our potential to grow the company and a shared commitment to protect wildlife and the environment,” Joel Manby, SeaWorld’s chief executive, said in a statement.

SeaWorld will advise Zhonghong on new parks in China, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau. In return, Zhonghong will gain two seats on SeaWorld’s board.

“We are delighted to engage with SeaWorld to bring this iconic, world-class family entertainment brand to China,” said Yoshikazu Maruyama, president of Zhonghong’s American holdings. “SeaWorld’s commitment to inspiring guests to protect animals and our oceans is increasingly relevant to people all around the world.”

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nNxo0L
EmailFacebook

BUSINESS DAY
Cornell Law to Start Technology-Focused Program on Roosevelt Island

By ELIZABETH OLSON
The Bloomberg Center at Cornell University’s new Cornell Tech campus on Roosevelt Island in New York City. Karsten Moran for The New York Times
Cornell Law School, one of the top-ranked law schools in the nation, plans to offer a new juris doctorate program at the soon-to-be opened Cornell Tech campus on Roosevelt Island in New York City.

Students at Cornell Law — which is in Ithaca, northwest of New York City — will be able to study legal issues including technology information, especially privacy and cybersecurity, at Cornell’s new technology campus starting in the spring semester of 2018.

The new program in information and technology law will accommodate up to 20 full-time law students each semester.

The law school is No. 3 in job placement among law schools, but establishing a beachhead in Manhattan will put its students closer to a major tech center at a time when more legal employment is centered in and near cities.

“The program provides an exciting new way for our students to study this important area of the law in the heart of the fastest growing tech market in the country,” said Eduardo M. Peñalver, the school’s dean.

Students will be able “to explore the diverse legal issues raised by information and technology, such as privacy and cybersecurity, as well as the constitutional and regulatory implications of new technology and big data,” he said.

Cornell will not be the only law school in New York City that offers technology courses. Fordham University’s School of Law, for example, has an intellectual property and information technology law program. More law schools are encouraging students with technical backgrounds to seek a law degree, and more employers are recruiting law graduates conversant in technology and allied fields.

Cornell’s program will be located on its new 12-acre, $2 billion campus, which is set to open in mid-2017 and represents a partnership with the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology. The program will be housed in a new building equipped with the latest systems, including geothermal heating and cooling.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mZiEaF
EmailFacebook

BUSINESS DAY
British Court Blocks Article on a Top Fund

By CHAD BRAY
LONDON — A High Court judge has blocked Reuters from publishing an article about the hedge fund manager Brevan Howard Asset Management, citing the confidential nature of information at issue in the story.

In Britain, companies and individuals can seek civil injunctions to prevent journalists from publishing articles that may contain confidential information or infringe on their privacy. The tactic is often used to prevent tabloids from reporting details about the personal lives of celebrities.

But last week, Brevan Howard, one of Britain’s largest hedge funds, sought the injunction as Reuters prepared to publish an article about the firm. It is not known what information the article contained.

In a statement made public on Friday, the judge did not indicate the nature of the article but said he had issued an injunction against Reuters, its reporter and an unnamed person, or people, who “leaked investment documents belonging to the claimant.”

“I found that the information in question was confidential and that the public interest in the maintenance of confidentiality outweighed the public interest in disclosure,” Justice Andrew J. Popplewell of the High Court said in the statement.

The judge said he would provide a longer explanation of his ruling in a public judgment to be handed down soon.

British courts, seeking to avoid prejudicing juries or defendants, routinely restrict the ability of the news media to publish some aspects of criminal and civil cases that would be reported as a matter of course in the United States.

A Reuters statement said the news agency’s objective was to publish articles that are in the public interest, “which we believe outweighs the confidentiality concerns put forward in this matter.”

“We are therefore deeply disappointed by this ruling and are reviewing the court’s decision,” the statement said.

Brevan Howard said it “highly values its ability to engage with its investor base on a candid and confidential basis.”

“To protect the integrity of its communications, the firm successfully sought and obtained an injunction to restrain the use of a report based on confidential information made available to investors that was obtained by Reuters in breach of confidence,” the company said in a statement.

Follow Chad Bray on Twitter @Chadbray.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nMggIK
EmailFacebook

BUSINESS DAY | WEALTH MATTERS
Charitable Wedding Registries: For the Couples Who Have It All

By PAUL SULLIVAN
James Nero and Lindsay McKay with their dogs, Sansa and Wolfgang, in the Venice neighborhood of Los Angeles. The couple, who will marry in September, are asking that guests donate to a no-kill animal shelter. Oriana Koren for The New York Times
Christopher and Deirdre Culver met four years ago in Newport, R.I., aboard his yacht, through mutual friends. Their courtship was rooted in their love of the sea and of sailing. One sign that they made a good couple was the experience they had sailing together on his yacht in a race.

“He’s very calm,” Ms. Culver said. “He thinks of it as a team effort. We win as a team, we lose as a team.”

Both in their 50s and successful in their own careers, the Culvers felt they needed nothing in the way of gifts when they married two years ago at the American Yacht Club in Rye, N.Y. He is the chief executive of the Health Media Network, a technology company. She is a vice president at Brookside Mezzanine Partners, which provides financing to small and medium-size companies.

They decided to put just one item on their registry: a link to Sail to Prevail, a charity that teaches disabled children and adults to sail and in the process imparts life skills.

The Culvers’ wedding ended up raising enough money to help the group build an endowment, with some money left over for general operating expenses.

Lindsay McKay having a trial run done of her bridal hairdo and makeup. Ms. McKay, a Hollywood costume designer, credits a rescue dog with helping change the pace of her life. Oriana Koren for The New York Times
“It made a major, significant difference,” said Paul Callahan, chief executive of Sail to Prevail. “We’ve got a million-dollar budget and it helped seed that comfortably.”

Technology has made it easier for couples, from millennials to older adults, to replace wedding gifts with charitable donations. Given the vast amount of money spent on weddings in the United States each year, this shift could move the charitable needle in a major way.

In 2015, 2.2 million couples married in the United States, according to the National Center for Health Statistics. Last year, couples spent, on average, $35,000 to cover the costs of their big day, according to the annual survey by the Knot, the wedding website, of its membership. Their guests spent, on average, $127 on a gift if they were family members and $99 if they were friends, according to an American Express survey.

Wedding planners and philanthropic advisers say the interest in including a charity on a wedding registry has paralleled the growth of internet registries. In essence, when guests can click online boxes for wine glasses, vases, china sets, silverware and silver picture frames, it is just as simple to add a link to a charity of the couple’s choice.

“It’s easy for people who don’t have the dream of a registry for gifts in the traditional way,” said Anthony Taccetta, a wedding and event planner in New York.

Ms. McKay shared a picture of her dog Sansa on her phone. Oriana Koren for The New York Times
He said he recently worked with one couple who wanted donations to go to the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Community Center in New York and raised over $10,000. Another couple, who had their dog in their wedding, were able to raise more than $15,000 for the Humane Society of New York.

Lindsay McKay, 37, and James Nero, 38, who are to be married in September in Santa Barbara, Calif., are making the rescue dog that brought them together a focus of their wedding. While they are registered at traditional places like Williams-Sonoma, they are also asking people to make donations to a no-kill animal shelter in Los Angeles.

Ms. McKay credits the dog she adopted from the shelter with leading her to slow down in her life — she’s a Hollywood costume designer — and making herself more open to a relationship.

Adding a nonprofit organization to a registry is fairly simple. The Culvers simply put a link on their wedding website to Sail to Prevail. Ms. McKay and Mr. Nero broached the idea with their wedding planner, Beth Helmstetter, who about a year ago started a website called the Good Beginning, to ease the process of charitable gift-giving for guests and make gifts trackable the way they are in a regular registry for couples.

“What is important to couples is they want to be able to thank people for those donations,” said Ms. Helmstetter, who charges 10 percent of the donation for the service.

Ms. McKay and Mr. Nero taking their dogs on a walk. A website started by their wedding planner helped them with adding a charity to their registry. Oriana Koren for The New York Times
Since it started last year, some 800 couples have used the platform to set up charitable gift registries, including 10 of her client couples, she said. She hopes to reach $500,000 in donations by next year.

Ms. Helmstetter is not alone. Other websites, including Blueprint Registry, SimpleRegistry and JustGive, allow charities to be added to wedding registries.

Of course, for many couples, wedding presents give them their start in life. Those sheets, plates and glasses are practical help in setting up their lives together as much as they are nice gifts.

But more affluent couples who can afford to buy what they want or older couples who have already accumulated what they need often face the opposite problem: having two of everything. They may even be preparing to downsize.

While it might be easy to dismiss these charitable options as just one more request of guests who may already be spending a lot of money traveling to a wedding, the registries have the potential to be effective and to have a positive impact.

“I think there’s a growing awareness among millennials that what you do with your whole life should reflect your values,” said Melissa A. Berman, chief executive of Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors. “Millennials have really pushed this into the forefront.”

For the charities themselves, being given prominent billing on a couple’s wedding day, when their closest friends and family are there, can bring new donors to the cause.

“From where I sit, it’s awfully thoughtful and generous,” Mr. Callahan of Sail to Prevail said. “When you do something so special as this at one of the two to three most important days of your life, it sends a message to the people who are close to you.”

Ms. Culver said what made her happiest were the guests who were not sailors and did not know about Sail to Prevail ahead of time. “We got some great bites,” she said. “I wouldn’t care if someone gave $10 or $100.”

Putting a charity on a wedding registry is not without some risk. With some causes, there is the potential to alienate guests. Ms. Berman said making Planned Parenthood the recipient of wedding largess, for example, could risk alienating guests who are opposed to the organization’s mission.

“Guests might feel like they’re being told their values are wrong,” she said. “Most people I know who are doing this always offer this as an option. Or they stick to charities everyone is O.K. with or say, ‘some other organization of your choice.’”

If couples still want or need gifts, Mr. Taccetta said, they can incorporate a donation into the party favors. He said he had clients who totaled up what they would spend on party favors — generally $5 to $100 per person — and made a donation in that amount to their favorite charities.

“They just leave a note saying a donation has been made in your name to an organization in lieu of a gift,” he said. “It’s another way to bring a donation into a wedding.”

And it also saves guests from having to cart home a jar full of seashells or other cute but useless mementos.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nMsOQt
EmailFacebook

BUSINESS DAY
Want to Disappear From Facebook and Twitter? First, Know the Perks and Pitfalls

By CHRISTOPHER MELE
Quitting your social media accounts is not always foolproof. And while it can lead to more free time, it can also cut you off from your loved ones. And it may look suspicious to a potential employer. Darren Hauck for The New York Times
Part of the allure of social media is telling friends and strangers what’s happening in your life.

Post. Tweet. Share. Repeat.

But suppose you are worried that you have revealed too much and want to protect your privacy. You can delete your social media accounts and try to cover up your digital footprints — but be warned: The process can be laborious and is not always foolproof.

Why are you leaving?

Experts cautioned against trying to erase every trace of yourself from the internet.

Rather than obliterating your social media presence, clean it up by deleting or deactivating dormant accounts, said Amy A. Lavin, a professor of management information systems at Temple University.

Lavin said that she had recently deleted her Myspace account because it was years old, probably had a “supersimple” password, and she wanted to reduce the risk that someone might take photos from her profile and use them against her.

“I think it’s a matter of being as responsible about your social media presence as your personal presence,” she said. “What is it you want people to see and know about you?”

Bruce R. Mendelsohn, a digital marketing and social media consultant, recommended staying on LinkedIn, the professional networking site. If potential employers cannot find you there, they may wonder what you are hiding, he said.

“Not being on social media raises questions about legitimacy, popularity and hipness,” he said.

Also consider your motives for wanting to disappear, Robert Siciliano, chief executive of IDTheftSecurity.com, said in an email. Are you a private person who doesn’t want the world to know your personal information? Or do you feel threatened somehow?

How to delete your accounts

Sites such as accountkiller.com, deseat.me and justdelete.me link you to pages where you can delete your profiles and they provide step-by-step instructions and useful tips.

Mr. Mendelsohn suggested a “nuclear option” — deleting your accounts entirely on the “Big Four”: Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn and Google Plus — or a “limited strike” of deleting selected posts by or about you.

Gone but not forgotten

“Whenever you’re deleting a social media profile, it’s important to check whether the process actually deletes your profile or simply deactivates it,” Henry Carter, a professor of computing sciences at Villanova University, said in an email.

Even when you close an account, some sites might retain your data and keep an “inactive” version of your profile posted should you decide to return, he wrote.

You might be able to remove content you created, but it will be impossible to stop others from posting about you, said Allison Matherly, digital engagement coordinator at Texas Tech University. “In the long run, removing 100 percent of references to yourself from social media is highly improbable,” she wrote in an email.

Don’t forget other sites

While Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn and Instagram may be your most frequent stops online, don’t overlook other platforms such as dating sites, blogs, Flickr, eBay, Amazon, Craigslist, PayPal and support forums.

“We often only think of the social media channels we are currently using, when we have actually been online and using social media or similar forms of two-way online communication for much longer than we think,” Ms. Matherly wrote.

What do you stand to lose?

Disappearing from the web can mean losing any marketing presence you’ve established, Mr. Siciliano said. You also may be unable to restart an eliminated account with the same name or email address.

And unplugging from social media can mean losing touch with family and friends “in an age when the letter and even the phone call are not used as often,” Ms. Matherly said.

“Many people find communities of others similar to them, and take solace and thrive from interactions with those individuals regularly,” she added.

What do you stand to gain?

Get rid of social media and you will have more time to do other things, Mr. Mendelsohn said. “It’s the whole FOMO thing — fear of missing out,” he said. “You’re going to relieve yourself of a lot of anxiety.”

John DeSanto, 65, of Warwick, N.Y., shut down his Facebook account in January after having it for about six years. When he was on Facebook, he went out of his way to do things that he could post so he could show off to his friends, “possibly creating a persona that may not have been completely accurate,” he said in an email.

Mr. DeSanto said he deleted his account because a relative was attacking his friends over politics. After quitting Facebook, he missed it for about two weeks, he said, but now it’s like it never existed.

The internet and social media have provided platforms where “everybody’s unintelligent ideas are flying in circles like mosquitoes around the digital campfire,” he wrote. “So now, in the world of online commenting, it’s all stupidity, all the time.”

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2mXBFuk
EmailFacebook

NEXT SECTION: SPORTS SATURDAY

PREVIOUS SECTION: BUSINESS DAY
SPORTS SATURDAY | SOUTH CAROLINA 70, BAYLOR 50
Surprising South Carolina Makes a Leap

By ZACH SCHONBRUN

South Carolina’s Maik Kotsar (21), Chris Silva (30) and Rakym Felder (4) celebrated after defeating Baylor. Robert Deutsch/USA Today Sports, via Reuters
South Carolina’s win over second-seeded Duke was not only a surprise to fans. In the postgame revelry, Coach Frank Martin had to ask an assistant whom his team would face next.

“Who we got?” Martin said.

The answer was that the seventh-seeded Gamecocks would face Baylor in New York, at Madison Square Garden. A tide of emotions swept over the coach. Martin knows the deep roots that the South Carolina program has here, the pipeline that the former coach Frank McGuire once established out of the boroughs, busing a city’s flair to the southern countryside.

First, Bobby Cremins, then Kevin Joyce, Mike Dunleavy and Brian Winters. Those last three were on the team in 1973, the last one from South Carolina to win in the N.C.A.A. tournament. Before this one.

This team followed its upset of Duke with a complete thrashing of third-seeded Baylor, 70-50, and now goes zooming into the round of 8 to face Florida, propelled by a victory that McGuire, who died in 1994, would unquestionably have adored.


South Carolina’s Sindarius Thornwell (0) and Baylor’s Ishmail Wainright (24) scrambled for a loose ball in the second half. Julio Cortez/Associated Press
“It all starts with our mindset,” Martin said. “We have got guys that are completely bought into what we do.”

Baylor, a team whose individual talent can leave N.B.A. scouts drooling, one that rose to No. 1 in the nation earlier this season, learned the hard way on Friday. South Carolina’s defense has made many teams look bad this season, including, in certain moments, Duke. But for nearly eight minutes in the first half, there was a point when Baylor’s offense seemed actually to be deserving of some pity. After taking a lead, 15-13, with 9 minutes 58 seconds left in the half, the Bears stopped scoring. Minutes ticked by. Misses piled up. The momentum turned into a landslide.

It was as dry a spell as any in Madison Square Garden this season — and that is saying something in the home of the woeful Knicks. The Gamecocks capitalized on the Bears’ incompetence — they missed 11 straight shots — by scoring 18 unanswered points. A 3-pointer by Jake Lindsey ended the drought, 7:37 after it began. Trailing by 37-22 at halftime, Baylor slumped off to its locker room looking shellshocked.

“When you miss the first couple,” Baylor Coach Scott Drew said, “instead of the basket getting bigger, it gets smaller.”

South Carolina’s defense only seemed to intensify in the second half, as did its effect on the Bears. Baylor’s players dropped easy passes, dribbled off their own feet, and stepped mindlessly out of the bounds.


South Carolina’s Duane Notice (10) drove to the basket against the Baylor defense in the second half. Maddie Meyer/Getty Images
“I felt like we were in their heads the whole game,” said Sindarius Thornwell, the Gamecocks’ senior forward.

South Carolina’s players said Thursday that it was easy to pinpoint from where their defensive prowess stems. It is from Martin, who calls the defense his “baby” and designed it in his image, an image he projects as he prowls the sidelines with a glare that could melt ice.

When asked how this team had managed to beat two of its last three opponents by 20 points each, sophomore guard P.J. Dozier had the answer immediately.

“Defense,” he said. “That’s what we hang our hats on. That’s what this coaching staff instilled in us.”

Against a team with more size, with long arms and lean torsos, the Gamecocks crashed the defensive glass, limiting Baylor’s putback opportunities. The senior guard Justin McKie called it “gang rebounding,” and it worked: South Carolina outrebounded Baylor, 40-37, and held the Bears to only 13 second-chance points.

“We knew when the shot went up, we all had to find a body and put our body on somebody,” Thornwell said. “We had to limit their second chances.”

A 10-0 run by the Bears midway through the second half pulled Baylor within 11. But a 3-pointer by Thornwell calmed things. Within a few minutes, the Gamecocks were back ahead by 20. Now only 40 minutes stand between them and the Final Four.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2n0Jkbg
EmailFacebook

SPORTS SATURDAY
Life Coach Gives Lift to Teams

By ZACH SCHONBRUN
South Carolina’s players celebrated after upsetting Duke in the N.C.A.A. tournament. Kevin C. Cox/Getty Images
Before South Carolina’s stunning upset of Duke in the second round of the N.C.A.A. men’s tournament on Sunday, the Gamecocks huddled in the tunnel leading to the court.

There they were addressed not by a teammate, a former player or even a basketball coach. The man in the center of the huddle was the Rev. Chris Leevy Johnson, a fourth-generation funeral home director in Columbia, S.C., who serves as the team’s unofficial life coach.

Johnson, a Baptist pastor and chaplain to the South Carolina men’s and women’s basketball teams, invoked the classic tale of David and Goliath before the East region game between the seventh-seeded Gamecocks and the No. 2-seeded Blue Devils. It was a fiery sermon, with a typically uplifting message.

“He’s always encouraging us,” the redshirt junior forward Jarrell Holliman said. “He knows we can do it.”

A college basketball life coach might sound like a far-fetched role to some, but it is one that’s growing in influence in the sport. Players for Xavier, the No. 11 seed in the West region, have sought counsel this season from Gerald Yearwood, a retired administrator turned life coach from Miami University in Ohio. Seventh-seeded Michigan has relied on Greg Harden, a motivational speaker and associate athletic director who previously advised Tom Brady and Michael Phelps. Kevin Jordan, a former wide receiver at U.C.L.A., now answers to “life coach” for the No. 3-seeded Bruins.

Johnson’s guidance for South Carolina has become so critical that he flew to New York for Friday’s game against No. 3-seeded Baylor. He typically sits behind the bench, a life coach who is rarely more than a shout away.

“I never even knew that was a thing, honestly,” Holliman said. “But it’s a resource I’ve used.”

Baylor did not have to search far for its own inspiration. Tim Maloney, in his eighth year as the team’s director of basketball operations, lists “life coach” on his official biography on the program’s website.

“When you’re down, or something happens to you, who comes along to get you going in the right direction?” Maloney asked Thursday.

A loquacious basketball lifer with the energy of an aerobics instructor, Maloney started his career as a fourth-grade teacher in Manhattan while coaching at New York University, and later earned a master’s in counseling from Hunter College. He learned about rational emotive behavioral therapy, the uplifting therapeutic approach established by the psychologist Albert Ellis.

Yet it is the elementary-school lessons that still serve him well.

“The bottom line is, you shouldn’t be comparing yourself to anybody else,” Maloney said. “Compare yourself to who you were yesterday. Be better tomorrow than who you are today. If you do that every day, you’ll be 365 times better than when you started.”

It does not surprise him, he said, that the Bears have advanced to the tournament’s second weekend, after previous Baylor teams fell short of expectations. As far as life coaching goes, he has not been needed much. But he is never shy about chiming in.

“Basketball isn’t complicated,” Maloney said. “Who complicates it are players and coaches. Players want to be coaches, and the coaches want to be players. Do you want to be part of the complication, or do you want to learn something and try to get better? So clam up and dial in.”

For South Carolina, Johnson is more than just a sounding board; he has become like a member of the coaching staff.

“He’s grown with us, and we’ve grown with him,” senior guard Duane Notice said. “He echoes what Coach wants out of us. He’s kind of like a therapist.”

The addition of a life coach to an already overcrowded bench might seem like overkill. But the age of social media has made some coaches more vigilant about what information their players are absorbing.

“I tell my staff this all the time: We need to speak to our guys about everything, every single day,” said South Carolina’s coach, Frank Martin. “Because if we don’t, someone else is. And if they end up listening to someone else because we didn’t speak to them, shame on us.”

Some life coaches are particularly valuable as mentors for individuals. Michigan’s coach, John Beilein, said he credited Harden for helping the senior point guard Derrick Walton Jr. mature over the past four years. Harden, he said last week, “has spoken a lot with him about him getting everything he can out of the blessings he’s had.”

Johnson, Holliman said, does not carry himself quite like a therapist or spiritual leader. He is somewhere in between — a funeral director, helping South Carolina keep its season alive.

“He’s always there for us,” Holliman said. “You can have a regular conversation, or pour your heart out to him if you want.”

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nKDH5t
EmailFacebook

SPORTS SATURDAY
A Team’s Fight Sheds Light on U.S.A. Hockey’s Leadership

By SETH BERKMAN
Jocelyne Lamoureux-Davidson (17) playing for the United States in the gold medal game against Canada at the 2014 Sochi Olympics. Doug Mills/The New York Times
After a 10-hour meeting Monday with U.S.A. Hockey, members of the United States women’s national team were confident that an agreement for increased pay and support was near.

“We felt like we were in a good spot,” said Jocelyne Lamoureux-Davidson, a team leader since the players announced a boycott on March 15 of the coming International Ice Hockey Federation world championship after previous negotiations stalled.

U.S.A. Hockey’s representatives, consisting of four officials and two lawyers, said they would present the players’ proposal to its executive committee for approval.

But by Thursday afternoon, U.S.A. Hockey had countered with a proposal far different than what had been discussed Monday. It had also informed the team that replacement players would be sought if a deal was not reached soon. The world championship begins next Friday in Plymouth, Mich. U.S.A. Hockey’s board is expected to meet Monday, to discuss the fate of the women’s national team’s boycott.

The team is not budging from its original demands, and the fight with the sport’s national governing body is drawing attention to the lack of women among U.S.A. Hockey’s leadership.

United States Coach Robb Stauber talking to his team during a practice in December in Plymouth, Mich., where the world championship starts next Friday. Carlos Osorio/Associated Press
Of the 14 members of the executive committee listed on the organization’s website, only three are women. Throughout U.S.A. Hockey’s internal structure, positions of influence are overwhelmingly held by men.

The Women’s Sports Foundation is finishing a report that analyzed the leadership structures of international and United States Olympic and Paralympic organizations. The report found that U.S.A. Hockey is the only national governing body among American Winter Olympic sports in which women account for less than 20 percent of the board of directors.

“The issues they’re having with the women’s team, it isn’t really surprising to think they’re probably not going to get the support they deserve given the leadership is not very diverse,” said Marjorie Snyder, senior director of research and programs at the Women’s Sports Foundation. “I think a lot of leadership is very much vested in the status quo, and they don’t want to give up their power.”

Published minutes from U.S.A. Hockey’s most recent meeting listed 91 voting board members, 15 of whom were women. In addition, there are only two women on the 19-member board of directors for U.S.A. Hockey’s charity arm.

“I think having female voices is instrumental to changing the internal climate, but also to make sure we are being sensitive to both sides, the way women are discussed in those meetings,” said Hilary Knight, a national team member. “Part of the problem is culture. We thought we made great strides in changing that, but haven’t changed it enough for them to treat us as women. Mentalities need to be changed.”

Reagan Carey, the director of women’s hockey, and Donna Guariglia, the U.S.A. Hockey treasurer, are among the highest-ranking women in the organization and were present at the recent negotiations. The former national team players Julie Chu, Jenny Potter and Molly Engstrom are voting board members, but Knight said that was not enough.

“I think a lapse in former player representation at this level is because of their previous experiences with the organization,” she said.

In 2000, the International Olympic Committee established a goal for partner organizations like U.S.A. Hockey to include 20 percent women by 2005. The Women’s Sports Foundation report said women accounted for three of 15 members, or 20 percent, of the I.O.C.’s executive committee in 2017.

Last week, the I.O.C. announced it would undertake “a major review project regarding gender equality.” Angela Ruggiero, a former American star who is in the Hockey Hall of Fame, is the chairwoman of the I.O.C. Athletes’ Commission.

U.S.A. Hockey is not the only American governing body lacking diversity. U.S.A. Figure Skating is the only Winter Olympic organization with a majority of women on its board of directors.

The Women’s Sports Foundation’s research showed that of the 47 national governing bodies in the United States, six have women at the top. Over all, 157 of 569 total members of national governing bodies (about 27 percent) are women, about a 2 percent decline since the 2012 Olympics. Only eight boards have a female representation of 40 percent or higher.

“The research shows is that unless you add multiples, women don’t have a voice at the table,” Snyder said.

The women’s hockey team is one of the most successful American teams in Winter Olympic sports. It has won a medal in each Olympics since 1998, and has finished either first or second at every world championship contested since 1990. Registration rates for girls continue to rise for U.S.A. Hockey. From 2014-15 to 2015-16, there was almost a 5 percent increase in female players, totaling 73,076. Almost 75 percent of those registered were girls 18 or under.

Many of the top youth players have supported the women’s team in its boycott, presenting U.S.A. Hockey with a challenge in fielding a competitive replacement team. Players from the professional National Women’s Hockey League have been contacted, but many have already voiced support for the national team. Several top college players announced on Twitter on Friday that they had said no to U.S.A. Hockey.

Today I will do what others won't so tomorrow I can do what others can’t. I said no to USAH & will not play in the 2017WC #BeBoldForChange

— Melissa Samoskevich (@M_Samoskevich) March 24, 2017
No team of hastily thrown together replacements would be able to equal the current American roster’s talent. The United States has won the last three world championships.

According to the I.I.H.F., player lists can be changed before and during the tournament; if new additions pass an eligibility check, there are no sanctions if a country uses a different roster than originally intended. (Of the 13 members of the I.I.H.F.’s executive council, two are women.)

The women’s national team is seeking a package of about $70,000 per year, currently near what the top players on the women’s national soccer team receive. That would be a dramatic increase from the $1,000 per month U.S.A. Hockey currently provides during the six-month Olympic residency every four years.

But the players are willing to accept incremental increases to allow U.S.A. Hockey time to raise money and develop sponsorships.

Almost 20 years ago, Hockey Canada and the Canadian women’s national team devised a varied system for rewarding their players, including donations from national and local governments, sponsors and a number of nonprofit organizations.

So far no corporate sponsors have stepped up to help contribute to an increase in pay for the United States women’s team. Dunkin’ Donuts, a sponsor for the national team and the N.W.H.L., said in a statement, “We continue to monitor this situation closely, and hope for a positive resolution soon.”

Nike, the official apparel supplier and seller of U.S.A. Hockey merchandise, recently launched an advertising campaign titled “Equality.” The company did not respond to emails seeking comment about the women’s hockey team.

On Friday, several star players for the women’s hockey team took to Twitter to promote their cause.

Show us what #BeBoldForChange means to you... pic.twitter.com/7WbrrcB9g6

— Monique Lamoureux-M (@moniquelam7) March 24, 2017
In addition to a fair living wage, equitable accommodations and insurance, the women’s hockey team is also requesting is more opportunities for girls. U.S.A. Hockey pumps millions of dollars into its National Team Development Program for its men’s team, backed largely by donations from the N.H.L., in the hopes of producing the next generation of pros. There is no equivalent system for female players.

The ongoing conflict with the players could be the defining legacy of Dave Ogrean, U.S.A. Hockey’s executive director, who is retiring Aug. 1. In the organization’s most recent meeting, Ogrean acknowledged that diversity within U.S.A. Hockey is “very poor” and that it was an important challenge to tackle.

During the meeting, the search committee for U.S.A. Hockey’s new executive director was also announced. Only two of its nine members were women.


Correction: March 24, 2017

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of a picture caption with this article misspelled the given name of one of the leaders of the United States women’s national hockey team. She is Jocelyne Lamoureux-Davidson, not Jocelyn.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nO6CFJ
EmailFacebook

SPORTS SATURDAY | NORTH CAROLINA 92, BUTLER 80
Top-Seeded North Carolina and No. 2 Kentucky Roll to the Final Eight

By SCOTT CACCIOLA
Kennedy Meeks of North Carolina threw a pass as Butler’s Andrew Chrabascz lay helpless to defend it. Nelson Chenault/USA Today Sports, via Reuters
MEMPHIS — Coach Roy Williams recalled feeling so inadequate in that locker room last season. North Carolina had just lost in the national championship game to Villanova on a last-second shot, and Williams was left to rummage through his team’s splintered dreams. What could he say? How could he help?

“It’s just like somebody reached into your chest and pulled your heart out and shook it right in front of your face and taunted you,” Williams said this week. “There was nothing that I could say that would remove the pain that those kids felt and our staff felt. But I told them I would hope one thing they could get out of it was to use that as fuel.”

The players who returned this season have fulfilled that desire, applying new hope to their old goal of chasing a national title. On Friday night, the top-seeded Tar Heels used their size and shooting acumen to overwhelm the fourth-seeded Butler Bulldogs, 92-80, in a South Regional semifinal at FedEx Forum.

North Carolina, college basketball royalty, advanced to the round of 8 for the 26th time in school history by shooting 54.4 percent from the field. Joel Berry II, a junior guard who had been dealing with a sore right ankle, led the Tar Heels with 26 points, and Justin Jackson, a junior forward, added 24. Luke Maye, a sophomore forward, came off the bench to collect 16 points and 12 rebounds.

Butler (25-9) offered something resembling a threat late in the second half when back-to-back 3-pointers by Kelan Martin helped trim North Carolina’s lead, which reached 20 points early in the half, to 10. But the Tar Heels (30-7) had too much size and too many options. With less than three minutes to go, Jackson misfired on a 3-pointer. But Theo Pinson, a 6-foot-6 forward, corralled the offensive rebound, and the possession led to a layup by Berry to make it 85-72.

Justin Jackson (44) pulled down a rebound for North Carolina during their rout of Butler on Friday at FedEx Forum. Andy Lyons/Getty Images
North Carolina arrived here for a regional thick with blue bloods. Kentucky and U.C.L.A., no strangers to championships, faced each other in Friday’s late semifinal. Butler, then, was something of an afterthought — to most folks, anyway. But not to Williams, who called the Bulldogs “pretty doggone good” before Friday’s game.

He cited, for example, that Butler had won its last two games against North Carolina, dating to 2012, as well as the program’s back-to-back appearances in national championship games, in 2010 and 2011. As a result, Williams said, he had not spent a second watching film of Kentucky or U.C.L.A. ahead of Friday’s meeting. His focus was on the Bulldogs.

As for Butler Coach Chris Holtmann, he expected to be slightly daunted by the moment. The program had been through a lot since making its last appearance in the regional semifinals in 2011, a roller coaster that winded through coaching changes and a move to the Big East Conference. Holtmann, who took over in 2014, has emerged as a steadying force.

On Friday, the problem was that he could glance at the opposing bench and see Williams, a dean of the coaching industry, the proud owner of 800-odd wins and two national titles.

“Somebody is going to be really calm come opening tip,” Holtmann said before the game, “and somebody is going to be really nervous. I’ll let you figure it out.”

Holtmann knew his team would be undersized, especially in the frontcourt, and he anticipated that the Tar Heels would run much of their offense through the post. He compared them to the Green Bay Packers of the Vince Lombardi era: Everyone knew what was coming, but nobody knew how to stop them.

Sure enough, North Carolina went inside on its first possession, finding the senior forward Isaiah Hicks for a short jump shot. What his players lacked in stature, Holtmann hoped they could compensate for with savvy. He relied heavily on the senior forward Andrew Chrabascz, who stepped in to draw an early offensive foul and drilled a couple of 3-pointers to keep Butler involved.

If there was one clear concern for North Carolina, it was Berry’s physical condition. He had rolled his right ankle earlier in the tournament and wore a walking boot this week. But he insisted that he felt fine, started against Butler and then thrived.

Berry made his first three shots, two of them 3-pointers. The Tar Heels sank nine of their first 11 field-goal attempts, and their lead swelled: to 10, to 13, to 16 and beyond.

Everyone seemed to get involved for North Carolina. Consider the unlikely emergence of Maye, who cluttered the box score in the first half: a career-high 14 points to go with nine rebounds in 10 minutes. North Carolina led by 52-36 at the half.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nOeAyM
EmailFacebook

SPORTS SATURDAY | KENTUCKY 86, U.C.L.A. 75
Kentucky Dispatches U.C.L.A.

By SCOTT CACCIOLA
Bam Adebayo (3) and Isaac Humphries (15) of Kentucky fought for a rebound against U.C.L.A.’s Ike Anigbogu (13) and Gyorgy Goloman during the first half. Kevin C. Cox/Getty Images
MEMPHIS — At halftime, Kentucky Coach John Calipari relayed a set of instructions to his players.

“Guys, are you watching this game?” he recalled asking them. “They said, ‘Yeah.’ I said, ‘Good. Then, you know we’re playing through De’Aaron Fox. The rest of you take a back seat.’”

Sometimes, basketball is simple. Such was the case for Kentucky on Friday night at FedEx Forum. Fox, a freshman guard, was halfway through eviscerating U.C.L.A. in a South regional semifinal of the N.C.A.A. tournament, and Calipari reminded his players to continue feeding him the ball. The second-seeded Wildcats heeded that message in an 86-75 victory that put them one game from the Final Four.

On Sunday afternoon, Kentucky will play top-seeded North Carolina in the regional final.

“I’m looking forward to the game just because I like my team,” said Calipari, adding: “I’m jacked up. I’ll sleep tonight because I’m old and I’m tired.”

The freshman De’Aaron Fox of Kentucky dunked against U.C.L.A. in the second half. He finished with 39 points to lead the Wildcats into the round of 8. Andy Lyons/Getty Images
Fox, a point guard who filleted a series of defenders on drives to the basket, scored 39 points while shooting 13 of 20 from the floor. Malik Monk, the team’s starting shooting guard, added 21 points. Both players are freshmen.

Fox was hot early, scoring Kentucky’s first 8 points.

“After that, I was like, ‘This is going to be a good night for me,’” he said.

Lonzo Ball, U.C.L.A.’s star guard, had a quiet night, finishing with 10 points and 8 assists, and then announced that he would declare for the N.B.A. draft. He is projected to be among the top few picks.

While Kentucky (32-5) leaned on Fox and Monk, others contributed. Derek Willis, a senior forward, connected on a 3-pointer with less than eight minutes left to put the Wildcats ahead by 8. Later, Fox escaped for a layup that pushed the lead to 12. By then, U.C.L.A. (31-5) was out of answers.

It a matchup between two of the most successful programs in college basketball history, Calipari spent the evening patrolling a patch of real estate that holds history for him: the 10-foot stretch of hardwood in front of the home bench at FedEx Forum.

For nine seasons, Calipari was the charismatic coach at the University of Memphis, guiding the Tigers into the upper echelon of college basketball. The divorce, though, was ugly. His departure for Kentucky in 2009 turned him from adored to reviled — almost overnight.

Calipari returned this week to make his first public appearance in Memphis since then, and he has relished the experience.

“We’ve got a good team,” Calipari said. “They share.”

Early on, the game shaped up as a battle between U.C.L.A.’s post players and Kentucky’s hot-shooting guards. T. J. Leaf, a freshman forward, scored 13 points to lead U.C.L.A. in the first half, and Thomas Welsh, the team’s starting center, scored 7 points. Kentucky, meanwhile, turned to Fox, who had 15 points before halftime.

The Wildcats took a 36-33 lead into the break. For two teams that favor an up-tempo style of play, the game was — for those first 20 minutes, at least — a defensive tussle. Consider that when they played each other in December, U.C.L.A. shot 53 percent from the field in a 97-92 victory. The Bruins, more than the Wildcats, want to play fast.

But once play resumed, both teams found extra gears. They combined for 27 points in the first 4 minutes 32 seconds of the second half, or a point every 10 seconds. It was basketball as performance art.

Over on the sideline, Calipari savored every second.


Correction: March 25, 2017

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of a photo caption in this article misidentified a Kentucky player going for a rebound. He is Bam Adebayo, not Isaiah Briscoe.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nOJJBQ
EmailFacebook

SPORTS SATURDAY
Notre Dame Shrugs Off Star’s Absence and Dominates Ohio State

By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Notre Dame’s Arike Ogunbowale shooting between Ohio State’s Shayla Cooper (32) and Tori McCoy during a regional semifinal in Lexington, Ky., on Friday. Ogunbowale scored 32 points, a career high. James Crisp/Associated Press
Notre Dame delivered on a promise by Coach Muffet McGraw that it would look different without the injured Brianna Turner. The Irish shifted from lobbing the ball inside to Turner, their star forward, to throwing up perimeter shots with success.

The strategy certainly suited the sophomore guard Arike Ogunbowale, who thrived from all over the court Friday to help the top-seeded Irish maintain their dominance in a 99-76 win over Ohio State in the round of 16 at the women’s N.C.A.A. tournament.

Ogunbowale scored a career-high 32 points in Lexington, Ky., as the Irish meshed hustle, crisp passing and a go-for-broke shooting approach from outside to make up for the height disadvantage created by Turner’s injury. The Irish made 12 3-pointers on a season-high 24 attempts.

“It’s evident that we don’t have Bri in the paint, so it’s spaced out a little bit more,” said Ogunbowale, who made four 3-pointers. “Coach told us to shoot our shot and be confident in what we were trying to do, and that’s what we did.”

Playing five days after losing Turner to a season-ending left knee injury, the Irish posted their third-highest scoring output of the season. They will face second-seeded Stanford in Sunday’s regional final.

Mississippi State center Teaira McCowan (15) during the Bulldogs’ first win in the round of 16. Sue Ogrocki/Associated Press
The freshman forward Erin Boley, who started in Turner’s place, added 14 points and a career-high 9 rebounds. Marina Mabrey had 14 points and Jackie Young 13 as six players scored in double figures.

Notre Dame (33-3) used a 30-point third quarter to build an 80-65 lead that was not seriously threatened.

Kelsey Mitchell had 18 points for fifth-seeded Ohio State (28-7), which initially shot well and handled its business inside but could not ultimately match Notre Dame’s pace and aggression.

“Any mistake that we made, they made us pay for,” Coach Kevin McGuff said. “They executed on offense extremely well.”

MISS. STATE 75, WASHINGTON 64 Teaira McCowan scored 20 of her career-high 26 points in the fourth quarter, and Mississippi State won in Oklahoma City to advance to the round of 8 for the first time. The Bulldogs will next play top-seeded Baylor.

McCowan, a 6-foot-7 sophomore center who entered averaging just more than 8 points per game, scored 11 points in the first 2 minutes 33 seconds of the fourth quarter to turn a 2-point deficit into a 7-point lead for the second-seeded Bulldogs (32-4).

Kelsey Plum scored 29 points and Chantel Osahor added 17 points and 11 rebounds in their final games for third-seeded Washington (29-6), which reached the Final Four last season.

STANFORD 77, TEXAS 66 Erica McCall had 23 points and 12 rebounds as Stanford outlasted Texas in Lexington to reach its second straight round of 8, where it will face Notre Dame.

Second-seeded Stanford (31-5) won despite shooting 42 percent and committing 14 turnovers. But it made 8 of 14 shots in the third quarter to take a 54-49 lead over third-seeded Texas (25-9).

BAYLOR 97, LOUISVILLE 63 Nina Davis scored 21 points for top-seeded Baylor, which never trailed in a round-of-16 victory over Louisville in Oklahoma City.

Beatrice Mompremier and Alexis Prince each scored 14 points for Baylor (33-3), which will next play Mississippi State. Asia Durr scored 21 points for fourth-seeded Louisville (29-8), which shot only 30 percent.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2n19RoC
EmailFacebook

SPORTS SATURDAY
Starting for Oregon in a Surprising Run, Three Freshmen Who Don’t Play Like It

By HOWARD MEGDAL
Oregon’s Lexi Bando, center, jumped into the arms of Mallory McGwire after the Ducks defeated heavily favored Duke in the N.C.A.A. tournament. Gerry Broome/Associated Press
BRIDGEPORT, Conn. — The Oregon Ducks women’s basketball team, which has reached the N.C.A.A. tournament’s round of 16 for the first time and faces mighty Maryland on Saturday, appears to contradict the idea that experience is vital to winning games in March.

The Ducks, coached by Kelly Graves, start three freshmen: center Ruthy Hebard, forward Mallory McGwire and guard Sabrina Ionescu. Hebard is the anchor inside, and her 20 points and 15 rebounds were invaluable when the 10th-seeded Ducks upset No. 2 Duke on Monday night. McGwire provides additional rebounding and offense out of the high post, and Ionescu is a versatile guard capable of posting triple-doubles, as she has three times this year, or making buzzer-beating shots, such as a 3-pointer she rattled in as time expired to win at California in January.

“I think it’s highlighted all year that we were freshmen, but Coach Graves always says we’re not freshmen anymore,” Hebard said Friday. “After 10 games, 15 games in, we’re just ballplayers. And I think focusing on that and knowing what we can do to help the team out is just what I try to focus on and not think about youth as much.”

It is striking, however, how many parallels there are between Oregon and third-seeded Maryland.

Hebard’s offensive efficiency is striking for a frontcourt player of any age, with very little wasted motion in her shot. Her ability to rebound, particularly on the defensive end, where she collects 22.2 percent of available rebounds, is exceeded by few players. But one of them is Maryland center Brionna Jones. Graves said he directed Hebard to study up on Jones not just for scouting purposes, but for aspirational ones.

Oregon’s Ruthy Hebard, right, reaching for the ball against Duke’s Kendall Cooper in the Ducks’ victory over the Blue Devils. Gerry Broome/Associated Press
“She’s really composed and a strong player,” Hebard said. “We watched film on her, and her ability to move people is something I definitely want to get better on, and her offensive rebounding is great. So I’m definitely going to try to watch her and try to be a little more like her in those areas.”

Ionescu’s precociousness has landed her atop many ballots for national newcomer of the year, although the Maryland playmaker Destiny Slocum also has supporters for the award. In both cases, putting the ball in the hands of young point guards has not hurt either team’s postseason prospects.

The teams also mirror one another on the perimeter. Oregon is the country’s best 3-point shooting team, at 42.1 percent. But Maryland (40.2) is fourth, one of only four teams that shot 40 percent or better this season. Lexi Bando, the Oregon junior guard, finished third in the country in 3-point field-goal percentage, at 47.7 percent. Two spots behind her? Maryland’s Shatori Walker-Kimbrough, at 45.9.

But while Maryland has looked like a championship contender all year, Oregon’s season featured more turmoil. An early-season injury to Ionescu contributed to an 0-3 start in the Pacific 12 Conference before the Ducks found their way, in part by playing slower.

That is one important place where Oregon and Maryland differ: The Terrapins play at a pace that is among the fastest in the country. Graves said Friday that if the score crept into the 90s, it would be difficult for the Ducks to keep up.

“We don’t have a ton of playmakers, so we have to do it kind of the old-fashioned way, through ball screens, through patience, through ball movement, through spacing, those kind of things, and I think it was just a natural progression,” Graves said. “I think when you have and rely on so many young kids like we do, they always play faster than they should.”

Oregon does enough well, though, that the Ducks have reached their first round of 16 — along with four other Pac-12 teams — ahead of schedule. Part of Oregon’s development has come from facing those teams all season long. But as Maryland Coach Brenda Frese pointed out, the year her Terrapins won the national title, in 2006, she started two freshmen, two sophomores and a junior.

Ionescu acknowledged that a little more experience might come in handy Saturday — “We had no idea what to expect coming into March,” she said — but she also said it hardly mattered now.

“I think once the ball starts bouncing and once it’s up in the air, it’s just basketball, regardless of if you’re a senior or you’re a freshman,” Ionescu said. “No one is taking it easy on you because you’re a freshman, and we’re coming at everyone just as they’re basketball players, we don’t care what grade they’re in.”

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nO8aPY
EmailFacebook

SPORTS SATURDAY
Pro Basketball; Booker Scores 70, but Suns Fall to the Celtics

By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
THE Phoenix Suns’ Devin Booker driving to the basket against Boston Celtics’ Jaylen Brown during the first quarter. Elise Amendola/Associated Press
BOSTON — Devin Booker scored 70 points, becoming the sixth player in N.B.A. history to reach that total, but the Boston Celtics got 34 points from Isaiah Thomas and outlasted the Phoenix Suns by 130-120 on Friday night.

Booker joined Wilt Chamberlain, Kobe Bryant, David Thompson, David Robinson and Elgin Baylor as the N.B.A.’s 70-point scorers. Baylor also held the previous record against the Celtics with 64 points in Minneapolis for the Lakers on Nov. 8, 1959.

The win was Boston’s third straight, and it avenged its buzzer-beater loss in Phoenix earlier this month.

The rematch was dominated early by the Celtics as they hit eight 3-pointers during a 37-point second quarter to grow their lead as high as 26 points.

Chamberlain had six 70-point games, and his 62 points on Jan. 14, 1962, had been the most in Boston.

Phoenix has already been eliminated from playoff contention, and had only eight available players because of injuries. Younger than some lineups in the N.C.A.A. tournament, the Suns have lost seven straight and nine of their last 10, and they were out of this one early before Booker’s explosive performance made it interesting.

His previous career best was 39, which he had reached three times before Friday. He had 19 points at halftime, then scored 23 in the third quarter to get the Suns back within range.

Boston took advantage of a disastrous shooting start by the Suns to build an early cushion.

The Suns missed their first 13 shots from the floor before Booker finally hit the first field goal for Phoenix on a layup with 4 minutes 40 seconds left in the first quarter.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2n0ZEbW
EmailFacebook

SPORTS SATURDAY | SPORTS BRIEFING
Golf; Johnson and Mickelson Cruise in Texas

Manchester City’s Carli Lloyd during the first leg of a Women’s Champions League quarterfinal in Denmark. Henning Bagger/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
Dustin Johnson and Phil Mickelson showed the simple side to the Dell Technologies Match Play in Austin, Tex. For three straight days in warmth, wind or rain, they built early leads and never let anyone get close to them in advancing out of their groups to the knockout stage.

For just about everyone else, it was a matter of surviving.

Friday was an easy day for Johnson and Mickelson.

Johnson, the No. 1 seed going for his third straight PGA Tour victory, again won the opening hole and showed why he might be the most feared player in golf at the moment. He shot 30 on the front nine, and all the PGA champion Jimmy Walker could do was make the match last as long as he could.

Johnson won, 5 and 3, and goes into the weekend having led all 46 holes he has played this week.

Mickelson made only two birdies, but he had no trouble during a 6-and-5 victory over J. B. Holmes. Mickelson has led 41 of his 42 holes this week.

The tournament is single-elimination the rest of the way, starting with the fourth round and the quarterfinals on Saturday.

KO FALLS SHORT AT KIA CLASSIC Top-ranked Lydia Ko of New Zealand missed the cut for just the second time in 91 L.P.G.A. Tour starts when she bogeyed two of her final three holes at the Kia Classic in Carlsbad, Calif.

Ko, the event’s defending champion, fell apart on the final three greens. She missed short putts on the 16th and 17th holes for a bogey and par, and three-putted No. 18, including missing a 10-footer just to the right, to finish a par round that left her two over for 36 holes.

The cut was at one over.

Cristie Kerr, the 2015 Kia champion, shot a three-under 69 to take a one-shot lead over Mo Martin and Mirim Lee.

PRO FOOTBALL

Oakland Makes Late Push to Keep Raiders

With the Raiders pushing for a move to Las Vegas, Oakland made a last-minute effort to hang on to them.

Oakland Mayor Libby Schaaf shared details of investors’ plans for a new stadium on the current Coliseum site and said that she and the city were doing all they could to keep the team.

In a letter to the N.F.L., Schaaf shared detailed renderings of what the $1.3 billion, 55,000-seat stadium would look like.

Schaaf wrote that the New York hedge fund Fortress Management Group was willing to work on terms for a $600 million contribution similar to the one Bank of America was offering for the Las Vegas stadium.

JETS HAPPY WITH QUARTERBACK SITUATION Jets General Manager Mike Maccagnan said it was “highly unlikely” that the team would add another veteran quarterback after signing Josh McCown earlier this week.

Maccagnan said McCown, 37, who signed Monday, has “good football left in him.” Deferring to Coach Todd Bowles, Maccagnan declined to say whether McCown would enter training camp as the starter over Bryce Petty and Christian Hackenberg.

SOCCER

Lloyd Scores in Manchester City Debut

Carli Lloyd did not need long to make an impact in the Women’s Champions League with Manchester City.

Lloyd, the two-time world player of the year and the captain for the United States team, scored the only goal in her debut as visiting Manchester City edged Denmark’s Fortuna Hjorring, 1-0, during the first leg of their Champions League quarterfinal late Thursday.

Lloyd, a midfielder, powered in a header in the 36th minute.

TENNIS
Nadal Opens With Win at Miami Open

Rafael Nadal of Spain won his opening match at the Miami Open, holding every service game to beat Dudi Sela of Israel, 6-3, 6-4.

Nadal, playing in Key Biscayne, Fla., for the 13th time, has never won the tournament. He was the runner-up in 2005, 2008, 2010 and 2014.

Making Nadal’s bid easier was the absence of Novak Djokovic of Serbia and Andy Murray of Britain, who were both out with elbow injuries.

In women’s matches, Elena Vesnina of Russia made a quick exit just five days after winning the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Calif. Seeded 13th, Vesnina lost her opening match to the wild-card player Ajla Tomljanovic of Croatia, 3-6, 6-4, 7-5.

HOCKEY
Islanders Earn Big Win Over the Penguins

John Tavares and Anthony Beauvillier scored in a shootout to lead the Islanders over the Penguins, 4-3, in Pittsburgh.

Beauvillier opened the shootout with a goal, and Tavares snapped a wrist shot past Marc-Andre Fleury in the next round. Sidney Crosby scored in the shootout for the Penguins, but Islanders goaltender Jaroslav Halak, making his first start since Dec. 29, denied Phil Kessel and Nick Bonino.

Anders Lee scored his 28th goal of the season, while Brock Nelson got his 17th and Casey Cizikas his eighth for the Islanders, who moved into the second wild-card spot in the Eastern Conference.

BOSTON UNIVERSITY EDGES NORTH DAKOTA Charlie McAvoy scored midway through the second overtime period to lift Boston University to a 4-3 win over North Dakota, the defending national champion, in the semifinals of the N.C.A.A. West Regional in Fargo, N.D.

The Terriers (24-11-3), who were outshot, 59-29, advanced to the regional championship, while the season ended for the Fighting Hawks (21-16-3).

PRO BASKETBALL
Wizards’ Bench Helps Dispatch Nets

John Wall scored 22 points despite dealing with the symptoms of a migraine headache earlier in the day, Bradley Beal added 19, and the Washington Wizards easily handled the visiting Nets, 129-108. Justin Hamilton scored 20 points off the bench to lead the Nets.

CYCLING
Valverde Leads Tour of Catalonia

Alejandro Valverde of Spain defeated his countryman Alberto Contador and the Englishman Chris Froome to win the decisive fifth stage of the Tour of Catalonia in Tortosa, Spain, and take the overall lead going into the weekend.

Valverde won after dominating the final climb of the 113-mile stage from Valls to Tortosa. He finished 13 seconds ahead of Froome and Contador.

Valverde opened a 21-second lead over Froome and a 47-second advantage on Contador in the overall standings.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nOK9Ze
EmailFacebook

SPORTS SATURDAY | ON BASEBALL
Behind the Rise of the Tampa Bay Rays’ Fastballs

By TYLER KEPNER
Blake Snell, a promising 24-year-old left-hander for the Rays, had a 3.54 E.R.A. in 19 starts last season. Leon Halip/Getty Images
PORT CHARLOTTE, Fla. — In the last 10 years, no pitching staff in the American League has recorded as many strikeouts as the Tampa Bay Rays’. Their pitching coach, for all that time, has been Jim Hickey, who spent two decades as a pitcher and a coach in the minors. When he joined the Houston Astros, in 2004, he saw up close how a rising fastball really looks to a hitter.

Hickey stood in the batter’s box against Roger Clemens. This was at Clemens’s request, a technique he sometimes used in the bullpen. From the box, Hickey could see Clemens hurtling his body straight to the plate, like a racecar zooming through the finish line. It seemed as if Clemens simply ran out of arm, the ball exploding from his hand at the last possible instant. The ball, Hickey noticed, somehow stayed true.

“He would turn and burn and boom!” Hickey said the other morning at Rays camp. “He wasn’t sitting out there living at 95, 96 — he could get it up there if he needed to, but he was pitching around 91, and I never saw so many major leaguers take it and walk back to the dugout. Because he had that finish to it — absolutely, positively.

“It was the first time I really was like, ‘Yeah, there’s no question there’s something to that, because 95 times out of 100, that same pitch on that same trajectory is going to be a ball low.’ But his just finished and rode through the strike zone.”

Fastballs don’t really rise, of course. But some fastballs defy gravity a little longer than others, so they seem to rise to the hitter. Those fastballs are not the ones thrown hardest, but the ones that spin the most.

At left, the Rays’ pitching coach, Jim Hickey, flipped a baseball in September while talking to Alex Cobb, who lost most of the last two years to Tommy John surgery. At right, Cobb threw before a spring training game this month. Left, Charles Rex Arbogast/Associated Press; Right, Chris O'Meara/Associated Press
“Hitters refer to it as kind of the invisiball,” the Rays right-hander Jake Odorizzi said. “You see it, but you can’t hit it — and it’s just a straight fastball. It’s a good weapon, if you can do it.”

Odorizzi can do it, as can a lot of his teammates. None of the 50 hardest throwers in the majors last season (minimum 50 innings) pitched for Tampa Bay. Yet a Fangraphs study this month showed that the Rays threw more than 60 percent of their four-seam fastballs up in the zone, easily the most in baseball. This continued a trend for a low-payroll franchise well known for seeking every possible edge.

For a while, those edges helped make the Rays one of the best teams in the American League. But after four postseason appearances from 2008 to 2013, the Rays have missed the playoffs for three seasons in a row. Their record last season was 68-94; only one team in baseball, the Minnesota Twins, was worse.

“Last year was humbling,” said Chaim Bloom, the Rays’ senior vice president for baseball operations. “We went into the season feeling very good about our group. I think our players did, too. It just didn’t unfold that way. So you take a look at the end of the season, and there are some lessons we learned and some things we thought we needed to address. But at the same time, we thought our talent level was strong and this was a core that had the ability to compete for the postseason.”

Pitching continues to be the Rays’ best hope. Since their last playoff appearance, they have traded a full rotation’s worth of starters, in James Shields, David Price, Jeremy Hellickson, Matt Moore and Drew Smyly, who went to Seattle in January for outfielder Mallex Smith. Another deal, though, brought them a top pitching prospect, Jose De Leon, from the Los Angeles Dodgers for second baseman Logan Forsythe, adding depth to a strong group.

The acquisition of the prospect Jose De Leon from the Dodgers in January gave the Rays additional depth in their starting pitching. David Goldman/Associated Press
“Basically we just have to pitch to our capability,” starter Chris Archer said. “We have to be Jake Odorizzi, Alex Cobb, Chris Archer, Blake Snell — we don’t have to be anything more. We don’t feel like we have to carry this huge burden. Just be ourselves and we’re going to contend.”

Cobb, who had a 2.82 E.R.A. in 2013 and 2014 combined, is back after Tommy John surgery cost him most of the last two years. As a sinkerballer, he still lives down in the zone, an exception on a staff whose fastballs had the fifth-best average spin rate in the majors last season.

But Cobb, in his 12th season with the team, has noticed how others are encouraged to pitch up, emboldened by data. It is part of an evolution in pitching, he said; fastballs once thought to simply be “sneaky” are now classified, objectively, as valuable weapons. In theory, pitchers know how to better tailor their game plans to fit their stuff.

“There’s probably been a lot of guys in our system in the past that might have failed because they just had their own mind-set of what their tools are, and using it their own way, like a ‘riseball’ guy trying to live down in the zone when, in reality, he should be throwing it up in the zone and having that changeup down,” Cobb said. “The way you’re taught in baseball is to throw the ball down in the zone, and maybe that was hurting some guys.”

Part of the Rays’ philosophy comes from recognizing hitting trends. More and more home runs are being hit off low pitches while home run rates for high pitches have stayed the same. Homers remain a natural hazard for pitchers who throw high fastballs, but for the Rays, everything else has a good chance to land in the glove of center fielder Kevin Kiermaier, a premier defender who just signed a six-year, $53.5 million contract.

Hickey has presided over the Rays’ pitching staff for the past 10 years. Bruce Kluckhohn/Associated Press
“He changes the game,” Hickey said. “Every day he’s not in center field, it shows up.”

The Rays had a 4.20 E.R.A. last season, slightly above the league average, but improvement seems plausible with a healthy Cobb, better luck for Archer and a full season from Snell, a promising 24-year-old left-hander.

Yet as well as the Rays’ pitchers understand their strengths, and how best to baffle hitters, their success depends on the same factors Hickey has known for decades.

“Nothing’s changed,” he said. “It’s just your ability to measure it, to put a number on it. But nothing’s changed in terms of: you’ve got to work quick; you’ve got to throw strikes; you’ve got to change speeds; you’ve got to beat the hitter to his spot.”

The fun part about the Rays is watching them do that with the trusty invisiball.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nNwAsQ
EmailFacebook

SPORTS SATURDAY
Astros Run Wild Against Syndergaard and d’Arnaud

By JAMES WAGNER
The Astros’ Derek Fisher (77) stealing second base on Friday as Asdrubal Cabrera, the Mets’ shortstop, applied a late tag. John Bazemore/Associated Press
PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Mets starter Noah Syndergaard has made a point of improving the pace of his delivery to home plate. He has had no choice, really, because he allowed a major league-leading 48 stolen bases last season and teams were increasingly looking to run on him.

Catcher Travis d’Arnaud, who did not catch Syndergaard much last year, has had his own problems with base stealers. Last season, when he missed two months with a rotator cuff strain in his throwing shoulder, d’Arnaud threw out just 22 percent of the runners trying to swipe a base.

He also struggled as a hitter, but the Mets did not acquire another catcher in the off-season. Instead, they brought in a new catching coach, Glenn Sherlock, in the hope he could get d’Arnaud to bounce back at the plate, and behind it.

That brings us to the Mets’ 2-0 loss on Friday to the Houston Astros, in which the tandem of Syndergaard and d’Arnaud allowed four stolen bases. Three were credited to Derek Fisher, and the other to Jake Marisnick, both fleet-footed outfielders.

Syndergaard has allowed five stolen bases in spring training, and d’Arnaud is just 1 for 13 in throwing out runners. And the only successful caught-stealing attempt with d’Arnaud behind the plate resulted from a pickoff by starting pitcher Steven Matz.

Manager Terry Collins insisted he was not discouraged. “The arm strength is there,” he said of d’Arnaud. “We’ve just got to get the footwork out of the way.” He commended d’Arnaud for an improved throwing motion, which has been retooled under Sherlock.

D’Arnaud did not sound discouraged, either. “For me, it’s getting the technique of the transfer down and getting a good grip of the ball,” he said. “If I get that, I have a higher-percentage chance of making a clean throw.”

Still, the issue of stolen bases could be a factor when the Mets decide who will catch on opening day, when they host the Atlanta Braves. Rene Rivera, who caught 23 of Syndergaard’s 31 games last season, returned on Friday from playing for Puerto Rico in the World Baseball Classic.

“I do know that last year Noah threw the ball very well to Rene,” Collins said. “There’s a good chance, certainly a possibility, that Rene will catch him that game.”

D’Arnaud has done well in other areas in spring training, hitting .325 with two home runs after simplifying his swing. “If he’s driving in a ton of runs, you’ll ignore what the throwing is like,” Collins said.

Collins also said Syndergaard has made strides in quickening his delivery. Nevertheless, Syndergaard and d’Arnaud were unable Friday to prevent Marisnick from stealing second on a pitchout.

“I feel really confident in controlling the runners and still delivering a quality pitch to home plate,” Syndergaard said.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2nO2xkF
EmailFacebook

NEXT SECTION: CORRECTIONS

PREVIOUS SECTION: SPORTS SATURDAY
CORRECTIONS
Corrections

FRONT PAGE

Because of an editing error, an article on March 11 about the Kremlin’s plans to sit out the centenary of the Russian Revolution misidentified, in some editions, the subject of a statue in the city of Yekaterinburg and the man who a historian said had ordered Czar Nicholas II and his family shot there. The statue is of Yakov Sverdlov, a local Bolshevik commander, not Lenin. And while it has never been firmly established who issued the order to kill the royal family, the man the historian was referring to was Sverdlov, not Lenin.

INTERNATIONAL

An article on Tuesday about the rise in far-right populism in a German town referred imprecisely to the proximity of the Buch and Wedding neighborhoods. Buch is part of Pankow borough, which borders on Wedding; Buch itself does not border Wedding.

NATIONAL

An article last Saturday about Andrew Napolitano’s assertion on Fox News that Britain’s top spy agency had wiretapped President Trump misspelled the surname of a writer of thrillers, the kind of novel to which a former Fox News contributor compared the gathering of evidence for the claim. He is Frederick Forsyth, not Forsythe.

NEW YORK

The “Spotlight” feature on Friday about Maggie Haberman’s attending her first White House briefing as a New York Times reporter referred incorrectly to The Times’s assigned seat at the briefing. It is shared by the paper’s six White House correspondents, including Glenn Thrush; it is not “usually occupied” by Mr. Thrush.

•

The Inside The Times article on Friday about why a headline on an article is sometimes different in online and print presentations misstated the title of Mark Bulik. He is a senior editor who oversees digital headlines; he does not run the digital news desk.

THE ARTS

An article on Thursday about Merriam-Webster, the oldest dictionary publisher in America, described the current edition of the company’s unabridged dictionary incorrectly. It remains in print; it is not an online-only publication. (Future updates to the dictionary, however, will be made only online.)

WEEKEND

A review on March 3 about the film “Logan,” using information from the movie’s distributor, misstated the number of times Hugh Jackman has played Logan onscreen. It is nine, not 10.

•

A dance review on March 17 about the American Ballet Theater, at the Segerstrom Center for the Arts in Costa Mesa, Calif., misstated the name of a character in Alexei Ratmansky’s “Whipped Cream,” a new two-act work. She is Princess Tea Flower, not Princess Tea Rose. The error was repeated in a picture caption.

T: DESIGN

A picture caption on Page 104 this weekend about men’s wear for spring, including different types of berets, misidentifies the designer of a beret shown on Page 110. It is an Albertus Swanepoel beret, not a Rothco one.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-8044.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.

SHARE:
https://nyti.ms/2n0ToAN
EmailFacebook